[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: Before we move on with this episode of the scene in the unseen do check out another awesome podcast from IVM podcast
[Amit Varma]: Cyrus says hosted by my old buddy Cyrus brocha
[Amit Varma]: The last time I tried to do push-ups I fell asleep here's what happened
[Amit Varma]: I decided that my life was too sedentary and I needed to get some exercise
[Amit Varma]: So I dusted off an old yoga mat last used in the 1990s
[Amit Varma]: Spread it on the floor and got down to do some good old push-ups
[Amit Varma]: But the problem is that I'm half Bengali and once I was prone on the floor
[Amit Varma]: I decided that the moment was too good to waste on activity and I drifted off to sleep
[Amit Varma]: I did do one push-up and I woke up and that's because I had to get up from the yoga mat and I suspect my
[Amit Varma]: Form wasn't too great
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, I'm not really the exception here in India fitness is not a big part of our culture
[Amit Varma]: Though I do see a lot of well-toned Bollywood wannabes around me in Warsaw
[Amit Varma]: And I have a private suspicion that they work out just to troll me
[Amit Varma]: But most Indians have low fitness levels and sport is also not a big deal among Indians
[Amit Varma]: We don't have a sporting culture as our lack of Olympic medals indicates the one sport
[Amit Varma]: We do follow cricket has lots of breaks in the action and until a couple of decades ago
[Amit Varma]: It was not unusual to see potbellies on the cricket field
[Amit Varma]: There are many who argue that for a variety of reasons whether culture genetics India can never be a sporting nation
[Amit Varma]: But there are some who believe otherwise
[Amit Varma]: One of them is a man named Joy Bhattacharya
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen our weekly podcast on economics politics and behavioral science, please. Welcome your host
[Amit Varma]: Amit Varma
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen my guest today is my good friend joy Bhattacharya and at the risk of
[Amit Varma]: Embarrassing him when he listens to this intro
[Amit Varma]: I must say that I'm a huge fanboy of joy joy was a quizzer and sports broadcaster bar excellence and
[Amit Varma]: Over the course of the last decade. He's built a remarkable record of building sports
[Amit Varma]: Ecosystems the subject of this episode
[Amit Varma]: He was team director of the Kolkata Knight Riders when the IPL began and helped put together a team and take it to IPL success
[Amit Varma]: After a few years of this he left KKR to become project director of the under 17 football World Cup
[Amit Varma]: Helping FIFA bring this event to India along the way
[Amit Varma]: He took upon himself the larger mission of making football popular in India
[Amit Varma]: And if you are not moved and inspired by his account of that journey in the second half of this episode
[Amit Varma]: I'll change my name to Amit Shah and once that project was over
[Amit Varma]: Joy became the founding CEO of the Pro Volleyball League, which had a remarkably successful first season earlier this year
[Amit Varma]: More than these though joy who was a killer basketball player in his youth the Michael Jordan of Kolkata as it were is deeply
[Amit Varma]: Passionate about Indian sport and committed to making us a sporting nation
[Amit Varma]: He's had a hell of a journey, but before we cut to the conversation, let's take a quick commercial break
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the scene in the unseen is brought to you by storytel
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app
[Amit Varma]: they have thousands of audio books that you can listen to on your mobile including hundreds and local languages like Hindi and Marathi and
[Amit Varma]: Unlimited monthly subscription costs only rupees 2.99 per month and you can also get a 30-day free trial
[Amit Varma]: If you hop on over to sorry 10.com slash IBM, I actually use storytel myself regularly
[Amit Varma]: So as long as they sponsor the show, I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love the book
[Amit Varma]: I want to recommend today is a classic children's book by a great children's writer
[Amit Varma]: Matilda by Roald Dahl and guess what if you tune into it in storytell you'll hear the voice of Kate Winslet
[Amit Varma]: Reading the book what could be better and remember you get a 30-day free trial only at storytel.com slash IBM
[Amit Varma]: Joy welcome to the scene in the unseen. Hi wonderful being here
[Amit Varma]: I've actually wanted to have you on the show for a long time
[Amit Varma]: It's a wonder that it took more than a hundred and twenty five episodes to finally get you on
[Amit Varma]: Tell me and my listeners a little bit more about yourself
[Guest]: Okay, so really I started my career in a company called Patni which is better known for the place where people like in and then
[Guest]: Illegally and there the whole Infosys gang made it
[Guest]: But I started as a software engineer and at some point in time by doing that
[Guest]: I was already into quizzing seriously into quizzing you appeared on quiz time. I was appeared in quiz time 1988 and I
[Guest]: thought that
[Guest]: At that point in time. I was going around with this girl
[Guest]: Who was a brilliant student and she seemed to be really interested in computer science?
[Guest]: And I said and she planned to spend the rest of her work life working on computer science
[Guest]: and I thought at that point in time that I
[Guest]: Should do something that I should be at least as interested in as she is in computer science to which point I said, okay
[Guest]: I'll do a year of software and then you know, do whatever else I that really interests me and it turned out to be quizzing
[Guest]: So that's where I joined Derek O'Brien worked in a company called big ideas for a year and a half
[Guest]: After that, you know once you get into television once I started doing the Bonita quiz contest and from there
[Guest]: I came to Delhi with a company called
[Guest]: TWA in those days. It was known as business India television, which was the business India group and I was there for a year and a
[Guest]: half and
[Guest]: From there. It was a company called Transworld International which at that time had the rights to Indian cricket Indian football in Indian
[Guest]: Hockey at the same time
[Guest]: So I spent a fantastic year and a half there and then why I detoured through Siddharth Basu's doing mastermind
[Guest]: I came back and joined ESPN star sports as their first sort of production
[Guest]: person in India worked there for six and a half seven years ended there as head of production for India and
[Guest]: And since then it's been mostly sport. I mean 2008. I joined KKR. I started off with KKR spent seven wonderful years out there
[Guest]: Then went on to the under 17 football World Cup where we managed to get actually on paper
[Guest]: We had more people watching on ground the under 17 football World Cup than the 2011 cricket World Cup
[Guest]: It's a bizarre statistic, but it's true and then now I'm just we're running this volleyball league, which is absolutely amazing
[Amit Varma]: You know some of this time you were behind the camera some of this time. You were in front of it like for
[Amit Varma]: Mastermind for example you set all the questions, which is like really interesting and then you spend all of that time in sport
[Amit Varma]: And you know when you were telling me about
[Amit Varma]: How when you decided you want to do something you're gonna be you you're passionate about and you thought of quizzing
[Guest]: I thought you're gonna say sport. No, it's strange. I mean I actually got into sport via
[Guest]: quizzing and it started off I remember I used to do a cricket quiz for business India television
[Unknown]: And I was obviously interesting sport. I've played you know the host also
[Guest]: Yeah, and I was at that point in time you know in the university
[Guest]: I played basketball for the university fairly seriously so after that when I was there doing this show
[Guest]: I heard that TWA at the same time had started a cricket show okay, and they had a very well-known statistician
[Guest]: Who's a very nice man still one of the best addition business as their question writer?
[Guest]: So TWA was just upstairs from me
[Guest]: So one day I turned on and I felt like doing my good deed for the day because my series had just ended
[Guest]: So I went up and I met these two gentlemen there one of them who heads I think Facebook for sport around the world
[Guest]: and I said that you know getting a statistician to write a
[Guest]: Sports cricket quiz may not be the best thing because it's not important that
[Guest]: Gavaskar's average is if it's not a 98 point you know it's not like a 99.4. It doesn't make a difference
[Guest]: However the fact that Gavaskar batted left-handed in a match because Raghuram Bhatt was running through the Mumbai batting order
[Guest]: May be a much more interesting statistic, so it's not a statistic much more interesting fact
[Guest]: So I basically give them this 10 minutes PL
[Guest]: And I came downstairs and as it turned out they went up after that and they gave it to the statistician
[Guest]: Two episodes later I get a call saying you know are you happy to set questions for us, so I said great
[Guest]: So in those days I sat and I wrote four episodes of the questions
[Guest]: And I gave it to them and they put it on air it was a rolling success
[Guest]: And they came back and said you know we can pay you so much for the questions
[Guest]: We can you know this is how much and that was almost my salary in those days and time working with
[Guest]: TVI that is business in their television, and I said sorry I can't take money because I'm working for another company full-time and
[Guest]: I remember everyone including my wife telling me you must be out of your mind walking
[Guest]: I think all my listeners are thinking the same thing. Yeah, I said have bigger fish net
[Guest]: So I gave them another four episodes for free and another four episodes and after that their producer called me upstairs and says
[Guest]: Can you look at the show and say you know what works? What doesn't work with the show?
[Guest]: So I said you know this works. This doesn't work. This is better
[Guest]: This is so they figured out that I knew television as well because that's been a year and a half two years doing television
[Guest]: And then they finally said that you know a bit sick of running this cricket quiz show will you come and run it for us?
[Guest]: Upstairs, I still can now we are talking
[Amit Varma]: This is not a long play. It was a long play, and I sweated it through I have to say right and
[Amit Varma]: And and then of course you spent a few years in sports broadcasting. What was it like?
[Amit Varma]: I mean one of the things you just alluded to for example is that
[Amit Varma]: you know the under-17 football World Cup had more on-ground viewers and the
[Amit Varma]: 2011 cricket World Cup and one reason for that obviously is that cricket seems to be a sport made for television
[Amit Varma]: Authorities in India don't really give a damn if people go to the ground or not grounds are so incredibly unfriendly
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense what you were doing behind the scenes in television and the television broadcasting of cricket was the whole game
[Guest]: No, no absolutely and that has been the way that almost everyone in India has looked at any sport in India because see
[Guest]: The spectators are supposed to be crazy enough to be able to
[Guest]: Survive an experience in the field that means seven eight hours without access to decent water to access to proper toilets to access
[Guest]: Which is why you'd rarely see in Indian grounds
[Guest]: You'll ever see women and children
[Guest]: And this is whatever's happened has really happened after 2009 and for give him credit Lalit Modi in fact
[Guest]: I remember in 2009 just after the 2008 IPL. He said that to if 2008 was about
[Guest]: The experience of the cricketers in the field giving them good places to stay giving them five-star hotels giving them
[Guest]: You know proper net training facilities
[Guest]: 2009-10 from now on is going to be with the experience with the spectators and that has
[Guest]: Dramatically improved in India otherwise I'll take you to the old is being on one one grounds where you know football
[Guest]: We talk about the nurseries of Indian football, and it's almost impossible for somebody to sit out there
[Guest]: It's like you're sitting literally on each other's laps. You're sitting on you know hard
[Guest]: You know wooden planks basically you're sitting on planks these planks are sometimes half rotten they break down
[Guest]: There isn't a bathroom to be had you wouldn't reach one for love or for money
[Guest]: so the experience was so bad that you know it was almost as
[Guest]: You're telling women and children don't come anywhere close to the field and that's what's now slowly slowly
[Guest]: They realize that boss. We can't do it with broadcasting anymore or
[Guest]: Two three really big events dominate broadcasting, okay?
[Guest]: So we have to now make a spectator experience worth being there must be toilets for women
[Guest]: There must be places where you can sit there must be places where you can get hot food without having to line up for 45
[Amit Varma]: Minutes in the middle forget, so I'm just curious newbie question
[Amit Varma]: How much of the revenues of the sport actually come from spectators at the ground itself as opposed to television?
[Guest]: I assume it must be negligible. It is negligible, but you know this is negligible say compared to
[Guest]: till about
[Guest]: Seven six seven years back though that numbers again changed because the new deal
[Guest]: about 21 to 22 percent of Manchester United's
[Guest]: Money came from gate receipts because they would price them at such a level
[Guest]: I know many people who are fairly well off who would go and buy a ticket for when Wigan men made it to the Premier
[Guest]: League to
[Guest]: Then Manchester, but they'd buy a Wigan ticket because they knew that they'll at least get to watch Manchester once a year
[Guest]: Because it's that expensive
[Guest]: And that experience has that much value so that's what I'm saying that
[Guest]: It's it is it's not that it's ever going to be the way broadcast revenues
[Guest]: But you're talking about broadcast revenue for the top broadcast events
[Guest]: You know what I'm trying to say is that if I'm going to compare IPL broadcast every and say that okay?
[Guest]: This is what IPL revenue is versus
[Guest]: This is the number of people in the IPL ground if I turn on and said that I had to do a Ranji trophy
[Guest]: And I made reasonably better conditions, or I had a Ranji t20 which had reasonably better conditions
[Guest]: And say I could easily make 20 15 20 lakhs from that match that match wouldn't have 10 lakhs worth of revenue on air
[Guest]: So when you compare you have to compare there are only two three really big sporting events in this country that make serious revenue
[Guest]: Everything else you probably if you have good hit revenue
[Amit Varma]: You're probably going to get a really good deal out of it and at some level does it also come down to incentives?
[Amit Varma]: I mean what Indian sport has been plagued by is that most Indian sport is of course run by the government
[Amit Varma]: Cricket to some extent isn't so it's a little better people don't realize this that the BCCI is actually much better than many of the
[Amit Varma]: Other sports organizations, but when it comes to things like grounds most of the grounds are essentially controlled by these old
[Amit Varma]: Government like organizations where there are no incentives to make things better
[Amit Varma]: And you'd imagine in the IPL age that would change because the franchises really want to build their own followings and cultures
[Guest]: So the interesting thing so the IPL also does not actually allow you to change
[Guest]: You know why because the BCCI has something else it doesn't have the government sitting on its head like everyone else does
[Guest]: But it has something else which is most important to all these guys, which is voting members so today
[Guest]: You think that a Mumbai Indians cannot build their own stadium. They could build it tomorrow
[Guest]: They'd build it in them in a heartbeat if they got the opportunity not allowed to know they can't yeah exactly
[Guest]: They're not allowed to because if they do then the MCA loses its primacy
[Guest]: And if you see there's a rule today in the IPL saying that every player that has made it has to make it through the
[Guest]: Auction even if your first class player now if that had been the rule
[Guest]: You know three years four years back a John Wright a Kieran Morris saw
[Guest]: Bumrah or a Hardik Pandya spoke to a John Wright a John Wright went and saw them
[Guest]: They then saw these guys signed them up and then they came into the IPL now if this rule had been there
[Guest]: there would have been no incentive to even spot a
[Guest]: Jasprit Bumrah or a Hardik Pandya because hell all of these guys are going to come to the auction all I have to do
[Guest]: Is another team is not even bothered to scout them all I have to turn on and say that whoever Mumbai's bidding for just
[Guest]: Keep bidding them. That's all I have to do
[Guest]: So actually what you're doing by doing creating a system like this is there's a total disincentive
[Guest]: Actually, if you look at it that way to scout or prepare talent for Indian cricket by the IPL by the IPL teams
[Guest]: There's no incentive for them teams are still doing it for some reason because they want to
[Guest]: Create academies create basis
[Guest]: But there's no logic to it in the sense that if a player comes up
[Guest]: He has to come up by the auction then every all teams have dibs on him
[Amit Varma]: Maybe every one of them can go for him. That's a little crazy because I mean one of the reasons the IPL was even named
[Amit Varma]: The IPL was big inspired by the EPL obviously and in the English Premier League you have the clubs with their academies
[Amit Varma]: You have a Phil Foden who's been nurtured by Manchester City now and is coming up you had the phenomenal bun
[Amit Varma]: That you had a class of 91. I think Manchester United who were all again there
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I thought the same system was in play because I keep talking about
[Amit Varma]: You know the rise of boom Ryan Hardik in particular as examples of how good incentives work because the teams had the incentives to do
[Guest]: This absolutely and now you're in a situation where these incentives from the last three years of IPL
[Guest]: This thing do not work anymore because you cannot sign a player before him coming into the auction
[Guest]: What's the impetus for the rule change then the impetus for the rule change basically is exactly that that
[Guest]: Larger systems can crank out more scouts put out more people on the ground and make sure that everyone is covered and
[Guest]: Also what they can do, of course, there's also wastage implied today
[Guest]: Technically a Mumbai Indians could sign a hundred and fifty players and you know put them out there and say that okay
[Guest]: I'm gonna sign you all guys up and then maybe only three make it and those
[Guest]: 147 remaining players don't have a chance to go anywhere else. So that might also happen
[Guest]: Remember in 2013, what was Kuldeep Yadav doing in 2014?
[Guest]: Kuldeep Yadav played the under-19 World Cup and then he played for KKR and did pretty well
[Guest]: He played the Champions League and did pretty well by 2015
[Guest]: He was an India player in 2013. He was bowling for
[Guest]: Completely spent his whole season bowling in the Mumbai Nets
[Guest]: He was one of the people who was part of the Mumbai signed up by Mumbai, but not part of their squad
[Guest]: So that's what I'm saying that so there is a certain amount of wastage involved because if you are a large organization
[Guest]: you can go and sign a hundred hundred fifty players and not do that, but I
[Guest]: Think that the way the the situation is now
[Guest]: I think it there is no incentive for any IPL team to really develop new talent
[Amit Varma]: Beyond looking at it as a profit-making opportunity. I mean that particular problem of wastage could I presume I'm just thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure it's been thought through by others could just be solved by saying that whoever from their academy
[Amit Varma]: Mumbai doesn't sign in any given season is open game for anyone else. Yeah, I think exactly
[Guest]: There are many ways to be sensible about it
[Guest]: I think they threw the baby out with the bathwater and I think that you know
[Guest]: What Mumbai that scouting process of Mumbai gave at least five players to Indian cricket, which will serve in intricate and very good state
[Guest]: And stopping it does not you know, really work
[Guest]: I don't think that that stops Mumbai from going in scouting
[Guest]: But I just think that it gives the others an unfair advantage
[Guest]: They can just hang back and watch what Mumbai does and just go after them
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I remember in around 2003 or 2002 when I was in cricket for I was covering a test match in Mohali
[Amit Varma]: And I met up with Bindra who was then out of favor with the authorities and I interviewed him
[Amit Varma]: that'll be linked from the show notes and this was probably 2003 and
[Amit Varma]: All the year before and Bindra said something very interesting to me at the time
[Amit Varma]: He said that you know
[Amit Varma]: What India needs is something like we need to move beyond playing for your country and for your states. We need a franchise model and
[Amit Varma]: There is this friend of mine called Lalit Modi. He's been banging on about this idea since 1996 and
[Amit Varma]: Basically laid out the IPL for me except that it wasn't t20 in their minds because it was a 50 over
[Amit Varma]: Thing but it was a whole franchise basing and he laid out the whole vision and do you think in some sense?
[Amit Varma]: that that vision was sort of
[Amit Varma]: Inevitable or do you going to happen at some point or do you think I mean this is again a question
[Amit Varma]: I put to the historians who appear on the show, you know
[Amit Varma]: when I talk about Thomas Carlyle's
[Amit Varma]: concept of the great man in history that is history sort of inevitable and flowing along larger currents or
[Amit Varma]: Are they great men who changed them decisively in certain directions?
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, for example without Lalit Modi and perhaps Bindra
[Amit Varma]: Would the IPL ever have happened or would we still have been drifting along? I think two three things happened
[Guest]: I mean Lalit Modi definitely they had but remember they had that proposal that's and the guy who wrote it
[Guest]: I remember was Arun Lal and they had gone to the detail of actually making sure that every match the man of the match would
[Guest]: Get a Mercedes car. That was the whole plan, you know
[Guest]: They'd get you know, so dead they detailed it to that extent the Tata's were willing to do it
[Guest]: It would be night matches all that was ready
[Guest]: The point was that it didn't float and it wouldn't have floated at all two things happened which really helped it
[Guest]: one was the 2007 World Cup win, which also think about it if for example if
[Guest]: If Saurav, Sachin and Dravid had gone for the 2007 World Cup, we would have lost. We probably wouldn't have won
[Guest]: I mean not the same team. It won't have been Dhoni captaining
[Guest]: We wouldn't have won. Secondly the ICL had started and the ICL was a push means these two things basically made it
[Guest]: Inevitable that they have to launch it this craziest thing about it is a lot of people don't realize
[Guest]: Then the first season the IPL they did not the Indian players didn't know anything at all
[Guest]: The international players did not think it was a big deal
[Guest]: So they had to be signed up. So if you remember he had a
[Guest]: $400,000 contract won signed a $400,000 contract McGrath signed a $400,000 contract and that's a minimum guarantee
[Guest]: It's not as if I'll put my name on auction
[Guest]: They said $400,000 you agree to pay me
[Guest]: I'll put my name in the league and they actually signed many players like this even a player
[Guest]: I think a Salman, but was signed for a hundred fifty thousand dollars, which is a ton of money for those guys anyway, give me
[Guest]: a ton of money for those guys and
[Guest]: Therefore if you remember when want came up the first bid they said was four hundred thousand dollars
[Guest]: Fortunately for them. He was picked up by Rajasthan because Rajasthan whatever felt that they needed to do a favor to mr
[Guest]: Modi, but they took him the fact of the matter was that
[Guest]: Even players who went for below that so if say a Salman, but for in for a hundred thousand dollars later
[Guest]: The extra fifty thousand was paid by the BCCI in year one
[Guest]: Because it was a minimum guarantee and I know and I've met Jacques and you know
[Guest]: I remember Jacques and Boucher being in year one in Bangalore and
[Guest]: They came and thought it was a bit of a you know hit and a giggle and we're gonna have some fun
[Guest]: We're gonna have some drinks. It's like any you know over the overage league is about, you know
[Guest]: You just play a few game then you go back, you know
[Guest]: It's like a festival matches used to be in India in the 90s, you know benefit matches and festival matches
[Guest]: And then after season one they realized, you know, hell no, this is serious stuff
[Guest]: This is a really really comparatively and if you see calluses record of a year one to year two
[Guest]: I think year two he became the highest scorer in the IPL and he was a completely different player because suddenly says no
[Guest]: Hold on. This is serious cricket. This is really high quality serious cricket
[Guest]: So forget about Lalit Modi even the players who came for year one said boss either give me guaranteed contracts
[Guest]: I'm not gonna come to a league
[Amit Varma]: That's what it was. So, how did you kind of get involved with KKR because few months before the IPL auctions happened if you remember
[Guest]: Yeah, you were there
[Amit Varma]: I was in Delhi with our mutual friend Devanshu and he took me out for lunch with you and Aruna was saying and the game
[Amit Varma]: Theorist yeah, and you and Aruna were working on something an auction strategy for KKR and the next thing I know you're in the dugout
[Guest]: So it was it was a strange one because it as it turned out what happened was that we I
[Guest]: Was looking at the IPL when it came out and they had the auction and a long time back
[Guest]: I had actually designed a game called super selector
[Guest]: Okay
[Guest]: And super selector what it meant was it was the first really fantasy game show
[Guest]: No serious to host and was big for a while
[Guest]: And I think it was just before his time because you know
[Guest]: They couldn't just get enough paid people on to it at that point in time
[Guest]: But what super selector did in terms of that was say that okay within a thousand points you have to buy an 11
[Guest]: Which is going to play and you have a certain amount of substitutions
[Guest]: And I said that is basically exactly what you know
[Guest]: This is about I mean an auction is about except the difference is there all of you could buy the same players here
[Guest]: You know if he buys a player you can't
[Guest]: So I said and I went to Devanshu and I told him that you know
[Guest]: I think this can be done if I can sit with a couple of guys who do game theory I can make an algo for
[Guest]: maximizing games for that
[Guest]: So that's exactly what we did we when they designed it those guys helped me design it
[Guest]: We put it together, and then I just suggested it to a friend of mine called jeet who was at that time
[Guest]: You know he was speaking with various franchises. I suppose is jeet
[Guest]: I suggested it to the Mumbai Indians, and I suggested it to Rahul Dravid who was there in Bangalore
[Guest]: And I remember it's a very interesting how all of them reacted to Rahul actually said you know come across
[Guest]: We'd be interested in looking at the algorithm
[Guest]: The Mumbai Indians said you know what we'll pay you a certain amount of money
[Guest]: Just to see it. It's not exclusive to us so their attitude was
[Guest]: We don't necessarily believe that what you're doing is the right thing
[Guest]: But just in case it is the right thing you I have as much knowledge as anybody else equalizing that
[Guest]: Very interesting way of looking at and jeet said that you know what?
[Guest]: Shahrukh is you know wanted to talk and meet and
[Guest]: He's suggesting why don't you go? It looks like a journey. They've promised nothing at this point in time. No money
[Guest]: No, nothing
[Guest]: Why don't you land up and so we landed up that night, and I remember sure if Ganguly was there and in those days
[Guest]: I used to smoke, and it was a sort of Shahrukh's at one long library and the two other guys
[Guest]: They were Andrew and Adrian who were the physio and the trainer, and they were very well-recommended the finest guys
[Guest]: Yes, in fact the only two guys still in the franchise from year one Andrew Lepus and Adrian
[Guest]: Adrian little and Andrew Lepus and they almost died of the smoke because of the amount of smoke
[Guest]: Hey, there's Shahrukh smoking. There's I'm smoking sure of was there and we all sitting and look and at two o'clock at night
[Guest]: Sure work that comes for the visit and said, yeah, Mary is the saracno, you know, which which is such a
[Guest]: It was quite a thing
[Guest]: So I was there the auction and then they were looking for someone to hang on with the team and run it and I said
[Amit Varma]: Hell in for a penny in for a pound. So what was your role then?
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: Technically, I was team director and which meant that it was like running the team on the ground
[Guest]: There was nobody else. My job was to everything from basically in those days John Buchanan was the coach. So
[Guest]: From working with him to working out logistics to working out systems to even looking at sponsorship to look at sponsor
[Guest]: Not so much selling sponsorship, but what you call sponsorship servicing, you know looking after making sure that happened
[Guest]: Working with the IPL any rule changes any issues?
[Guest]: So it was a very very overall role in those days. No, those are the early days
[Guest]: I feel it was the Wild West because and one of the things was that you know, take somebody like a Lalit Modi
[Guest]: He was you know, it's very difficult for us from outside to look at him and said, you know, okay
[Guest]: He was a brash man. He was this he was that I've worked with the BCCI much before, you know, when we were in
[Guest]: I'm GTW and then with the Spain's task force, you know getting boards to make a decision or a change take so much time
[Guest]: I remember sending a mail because you know when the league is new new things keep popping up saying that okay
[Guest]: You know this rule doesn't make sense because of this reason and so can we have a look at it?
[Guest]: And I remember sending a mail at 730 at night and at 830 at night a mail comes back saying noted
[Guest]: This is now the new rule. This has to change
[Guest]: This is a team note to all teams that if this happens this particular rule has to be interpreted in this particular way
[Guest]: In one hour, there was a message
[Guest]: You would not have that happen for love of a money in the BCCI before Lalit Modi came in and that was what he bought
[Guest]: And had he not bought that had he not bought the kind of thing saying that okay logo has to be this size
[Guest]: Those are things that BCCI didn't look at in those days
[Guest]: But if you allow people if you allow one team to make a logo a particular size and somebody else has a larger logo
[Guest]: Then finally, you know the law of economics
[Guest]: Everyone will end up with the large logo because they'll be forced by the various brands to sort of increase the size
[Guest]: So making restrictions on that making sure it was a thoroughly professional setup
[Guest]: I think that you have to hand it to Lalit Modi. He did it almost
[Guest]: Single-handedly, maybe a bit of an exaggeration. But yeah, it was very much. He was driving force behind it. What exactly happened there?
[Amit Varma]: I mean on the one hand it was this great entrepreneurial move and it was being so well
[Amit Varma]: Managed by Lalit Modi with so much dynamism, but on the other hand behind the scenes
[Amit Varma]: It was also politics and they were also
[Amit Varma]: Manoeuvring and machinations and eventually the poor guy had to go. So whatever that that happened for a very different reason
[Guest]: I think there is I firmly believe whatever the reasons that he went in 2010
[Guest]: Well, there was only one man who could have really bought down Lalit Modi and that was Lalit Modi
[Guest]: Okay, and I think he went by promising too much to people who were new franchises
[Guest]: I think the year he was looking out there. The Adani's were also looking for a franchise
[Guest]: I think so what Supriya Sule and you know, Sharad Pawar that group and
[Guest]: And somehow to keep four important people happy the third people were Shashi Tharoor and the Kochi team and then there was a Sahara team
[Guest]: And there were only two franchises and four people who were really interested in getting a franchise in those days
[Guest]: And I think he just didn't manage to make sure that you know
[Guest]: It was a matter of making which are the two people I can afford to keep unhappy and I think
[Guest]: For whether he chose wrong or it went wrong. I think that's exactly what happened
[Amit Varma]: So what was sort of the challenges and of running a sort of a franchise team?
[Amit Varma]: Well, you have people from different countries and different levels of the game all mixing together in the dressing room
[Guest]: Absolutely. It was chaotic because he at one level. So if you look at the KKR, you know dressing room
[Guest]: So you have Brendan McCullum your Ricky Ponting?
[Guest]: Okay, your players of that level you're out there and you have guys who have played three first-class matches for Bengal
[Guest]: They were with the dash was played three first-class Ashok Dinda who played one match for Bengal in
[Guest]: 2005-06 and then was dropped
[Guest]: So Ashok Dinda came to and that's again why the IPL is so important to Indian cricket
[Guest]: Ashok Dinda was basically fell foul of the selectors
[Guest]: He was he was a bit of a you know character a bit of a tearaway and he kept fighting with them
[Guest]: So he was completely banned. He was not playing
[Guest]: He was playing for a club called Kalighat as it turned out Jeet Banerjee at that point in time
[Guest]: Ran the Kalighat team in the sense that he was a guy who was you know behind the Kalighat team
[Guest]: So he said, you know, we need net bowlers
[Guest]: So when KKR net bowling started we called up the Kalighat bowlers and said why did you come and bowl?
[Guest]: Dinda bowled in the nets and he looked pretty good and John Buchanan saw him and
[Guest]: Brendan saw him and they said you know what this guy is pretty decent
[Guest]: So then they turned on and said that let's put him in the squad. They put him in the squad
[Guest]: From there on Dinda went into the 11 and the first ball in the IPL was actually bowled by Ashok Dinda
[Guest]: And if you look at his record, you know, you'll look at it
[Guest]: And you know, it does a bit of a meme now in international IPL cricket
[Guest]: Because the way he gets has got hammered in the final few overs
[Guest]: But that man from not being picked for Bengal for three years went on to go and get picked for India got more than four
[Guest]: Five hundred first-class wickets and that happened because the IPL opened a situation
[Guest]: Where a selector did not have the monopoly of Bengal selector state selector did not have the monopoly on deciding a kid's future
[Guest]: So if you see the explosion of talent in the last 10 years, it's not because the talent was not there before
[Guest]: But because now thanks to the IPL you have a situation where a good kid can go anywhere in the nets
[Guest]: Show himself as a player and he'll get an opportunity to perform today
[Guest]: The Uttarakhand selector or the Delhi selector can't close down Rishabh Pant
[Guest]: Just as much as they couldn't close down Ashok Dinda 10 years back
[Guest]: And that's why you suddenly have these 20-25 30-35 good players have come to Indian cricket
[Amit Varma]: So in fact, like I keep pointing out, you know before the IPL happened
[Amit Varma]: Indian cricket and in fact all cricket and all national sport in a sense was a monopsony a
[Amit Varma]: Monopsony is like the inverse of a monopoly
[Amit Varma]: you have only one buyer and and therefore that buyer can for your services and the therefore that buyer can just rule the roost and
[Amit Varma]: you don't have options and
[Amit Varma]: You know
[Amit Varma]: The power balance is totally on the buyer side and what the IPL does is you have all these franchises
[Amit Varma]: Competing for talent. You have multiple buyers for a player's
[Amit Varma]: abilities and in fact before the IPL began I remember there were a lot of
[Amit Varma]: Criticisms of the IPL for being this commercial Tomasha thing and I wrote a piece in
[Amit Varma]: Cricket for at that time pointing out that this would be the biggest benefit that we would discover new talent
[Amit Varma]: Because the incentives have kind of completely changed and how did it sort of once the players realized that this is serious shit
[Amit Varma]: How did it change from year one to year two? Like are they looking at it differently strategically?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a different kind of conscious coaching culture coming up where you have to nurture players? How does it all work?
[Guest]: How do you hold it together? No, I think year two was so far
[Guest]: See, I think the first three years ran by because every year there was some controversy or the other year two was a great move
[Guest]: You know is the IPL happening not happening and I remember sitting in February, you know
[Guest]: Month month and a half before none of us knew what it's gonna happen because you know that you know
[Guest]: Here's Lalit Modi up against Chidambaram who's the home minister of the country and the fact that they managed to move the tournament in 17
[Guest]: So year two was a lot about just making the tournament happen and even in that, you know
[Guest]: The way Lalit Modi went about it. I mean the sheer chutzpah of having a
[Guest]: You know a parade of IPL teams in Cape Town on the open buses
[Guest]: I mean the South African team wouldn't have a this thing like that and you put out
[Guest]: International teams with a lot of Indians and you put out a parade then he has this
[Guest]: you know goes and picks the most expensive hotel in Johannesburg to you know or Cape Town to be based out of you know has
[Guest]: One of his team owners has a Lamborghini, you know, which come came from Cairo because it was the only number available in Africa
[Guest]: Okay, and I remember the best part of it is he threw a party there
[Guest]: For the teams before and how did he make it the talk of the town in South Africa?
[Guest]: He just went out there and said here are the hundred top celebrities
[Guest]: According to people I've spoken to in Africa. If you don't have at least 80 of these people in the party, you've lost your job
[Guest]: And I remember the amount of press that was there and you'd be I would be
[Guest]: Continually amazed and look at it and said can you imagine the South African Premier League being all over Indian getting this kind of press?
[Guest]: I mean this guy for whatever it's worth
[Guest]: He did things that you know have not been done before and that was actually where he was at his best when he had
[Guest]: Concrete mountains to climb or things to actually achieve when he was left to his own device and everything was smooth. He would
[Guest]: Let it would find a way to make it difficult for himself, right?
[Amit Varma]: How does the sport itself change like, you know, I keep thinking of the counterfactual
[Amit Varma]: what if t20 cricket for some reason didn't happen or what if like you said that they selected the senior guys in the
[Amit Varma]: 2007 Indian squad and we didn't win the World Cup and the IPL never happened because you know
[Amit Varma]: I think there did seem to be a little bit of a crisis brewing in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: And tell me if you agree with this that back in the day, you know cricket was a big sport in India
[Amit Varma]: But people had lots of free time
[Amit Varma]: You could actually spend five days watching a test match
[Amit Varma]: but now with the world so globalized so interconnected because of technology and the internet and all of that that the
[Amit Varma]: Opportunity cost of the time you spend watching cricket has gone up exponentially and there are so many things you could be doing with your time
[Amit Varma]: that watching a five-day test match or even of a match that lasts a full day when all other sports are like a couple of
[Amit Varma]: hours or
[Amit Varma]: even less
[Amit Varma]: Makes absolutely no sense and did you kind of think the IPL came along just in time to revive it or do you think it?
[Guest]: Would have kind of coasted along and you know, I think I think it saved international cricket. It's saved international
[Guest]: I don't just say Indian cricket
[Guest]: It's a bit national cricket because if you look at people like even Nepal
[Guest]: Afghanistan these guys are now seriously playing cricket why because you finally have a situation where you have
[Guest]: Guys who can play 20 or cricket from them who can play as well as anyone around the world
[Guest]: Today you're just hearing what the European League which is starting with Ireland and Netherlands and all these countries participating
[Guest]: They're serious Caribbean Premier League. The West Indies is really invested in the Caribbean Premier League
[Guest]: They are investing seriously in the US Premier League the US Canada Premier League as well
[Guest]: So suddenly you have a situation where from being a shrinking market being ready is a growing market
[Guest]: I think the only single big challenge left to make t20 cricket because in many ways I think it's
[Guest]: easily as complex and interesting a game as
[Guest]: Baseball which is what its closest equivalent would be and I think given the fact of you know
[Guest]: You have this two and a half 1.3 billion Indians and that many
[Guest]: Pakistanis in Bangladesh she's watching it
[Guest]: I think the only problem with the ICC needs to solve to have really go
[Guest]: This is the problem of pitches because that's the one thing that stops cricket from being dropped on and played anywhere in the world
[Guest]: good drop-on pitches means, you know a
[Guest]: reasonably standard template of playing and
[Guest]: Already this game is exploding. It'll explode and in terms of technology is that near is
[Guest]: Already there. In fact in Divya Patil they've used drop-on pitches in Divya Patil for cricket games
[Guest]: They've used it at the MCG and you know
[Guest]: Because you have concerts and all and the whole this thing for the pitch is just dropped on three days four days before
[Guest]: So you actually have that because that will give you a level playing field
[Guest]: The biggest problem is creating a pitch over three months four months to a year and you know
[Guest]: Dedicating that pitch for cricket. That's basically your
[Guest]: Problem in being able to proliferate today if you take away that problem, there's nothing else left
[Amit Varma]: Why wherever you can play baseball you can play cricket and also the diaspora is so large
[Amit Varma]: Like I'll take this opportunity to recommend one of my favorite literary novels of all time Netherland by Joseph O'Neill. Have you read it?
[Amit Varma]: It's a beautiful book. It's about a cricket fanatic in New York who's trying to start a cricket club there
[Amit Varma]: I think and a lovely book at many other levels the cricket is just part of it
[Amit Varma]: So you work closely with a lot of cricketers a lot of stars and the thing is from the outside
[Amit Varma]: It often seems to fans that oh these guys are so aloof or so arrogant or so
[Amit Varma]: Whatever and one of the theories I've always had about cricketers is that no matter how they behave in real life
[Amit Varma]: To just get to that elite level you have to possess enormous humility
[Amit Varma]: Because what achieving a certain level of excellence involves is that you are recognizing your own mistakes and you're spending hundreds of hours in the net
[Amit Varma]: Let's sorting out your own mistakes
[Amit Varma]: How true is that and does some of that humility also come on to the approach in other things and do people get carried away?
[Amit Varma]: By the sudden stardom and the money that can come upon you
[Guest]: Lots of it. I mean, okay, let me start by where it used to be. And that was I remember
[Guest]: Arun Lal, Arun Lal used to be one of my favorite cricketers because he was a grinder never had the talent
[Guest]: But you know played four test matches for India made it there
[Guest]: So Arun Lal was also a commentator for the longest time with ESPN star and many other bodies and I said, you know
[Guest]: And I know Arun well enough to say Arun, you know, I just want to ask you one question
[Guest]: He said why I said why you cricketers such assholes such absolute test readers such absolute assholes and he sort of smiled and he said
[Guest]: I'll tell you something joy. So I said what and this is mind you this is the days before the IPL
[Guest]: He said after playing tests for India and I play just four tests for India
[Guest]: It's not as if I played 50 tests
[Guest]: he said it took me two years to learn to say thank you again after that and he says it's not and
[Guest]: Here's what I'm gonna say again after that. It's not our fault because in our part of the world
[Guest]: We are treated like gods
[Guest]: I've never even have to think about where I've left my bag because somebody has picked it up
[Guest]: I'm like we are all treated like this so much and that's actually even more
[Guest]: Before because you know test cricket or the international kid was the only game in town that people are suddenly you take that away from them
[Guest]: This it's a completely different ballgame
[Guest]: So cricketers are used to once you reach that elite level you are used to being totally spoiled
[Guest]: Having said that if I look at the cricketers again that you know
[Guest]: I had the opportunity to deal with especially guys who just had come into the system
[Guest]: So it's you shouldn't be judging us in a you know an IPL experience for somebody like it
[Guest]: I will drive disorder sure because he's played seven eight ten years of international cricket, but the guys who came on fresh
[Guest]: for a lot of them
[Guest]: see
[Guest]: Humility is one thing I think
[Guest]: To their two ways in which cricketers are reacted to is one is a such and then they'll cause rock college school
[Guest]: Which is that they were so good that they just kept playing their game
[Guest]: They never had any doubt as to what decisions they would take. That's one. That's one kind of guy
[Guest]: Okay, and there there's no decision to be taken. It's it's almost an inevitability that once they're on the path
[Guest]: They're so good barring injury or something serious
[Guest]: They are going to go through
[Guest]: The second is the guy who is the what I call the Iqbal Abdullah kind of cricketer
[Guest]: Kid from Azamgarh picked up comes to Disney College plays well for you plays 119 India gets into KKR plays for Bombay now for him
[Guest]: Cricket was what it is for, you know, the ghettos in America basketball is it's an opportunity to get a life
[Guest]: You do not have an opportunity to get a it's an opportunity to earn to make money to do stuff
[Guest]: So these two guys it's very clearly defined for them
[Guest]: you know they have to you know one of them because they are sort of destined to greatness the other because
[Guest]: This is their only opportunity for getting up in a normal life
[Guest]: Where the where it falls in the cracks is the ones who have to actually make this decision
[Guest]: You are decent at studies. So very good case is a chap who he was in a KKR camp
[Guest]: We had a camp in Mumbai looking at promising cricketers in 2008 and the chap called Saurabh Netravalkar
[Guest]: Who we thought was the best in the camp. So by the time we next spoke to him, he says no, I'm sorry
[Guest]: I'm out of it. I'm planning to go to the US. So he went to Cornell. He studied in Cornell
[Guest]: I think it was Cornell. He went and studied out there. Then he's now the captain of the US national team. Oh my god
[Guest]: Yeah, see in fact, one of the questions I've asked is that you know, so he's played under 19 for India
[Guest]: So my pet question is of the players who played under 19 for India in that 2009 or 2010
[Guest]: Under 19 who's the first person to captain his nation and was Saurabh Netravalkar, but he was captain in the US
[Guest]: He wasn't captain in India. Mind-blowing. Who are the others who have captained the nation?
[Guest]: Nobody else. It's not that generation who's the first. So yeah, I think if you see Virat captain 2008 Virat is now captain
[Guest]: Yeah, I think now yeah all the rest because they'll have to wait because Virat is just gonna hold it for a while
[Guest]: But I have a suspicion that at some point Prithvi Shah and Shubhman Gill will captain the country given the amount of time they have
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I think the World Cup before this last one. I think Ishaan Kishan was a captain, but he's not gonna captain India
[Guest]: Yeah, and you have I mean, yeah, there is Ishaan Kishan look at
[Guest]: our Delhi cricketer 2012
[Guest]: That kid who wrote the book. Chand, Unmukh Chand. Unmukh Chand just not being picked for Delhi also right now
[Guest]: It's very interesting. How are under 19 cricketers go is a book by itself
[Amit Varma]: It's somebody should write. What you're saying about Saurabh Netravalkar is also very interesting because then you wonder that if that same
[Amit Varma]: Situation if that same choice was to occur to a player say today when the IPL is as big as it is
[Guest]: Would he make that same choice?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think I think it find it much more difficult in Saurabh's case
[Guest]: The other thing was that he was a brilliant student, but I'll give you an example of somebody who was an excellent student as well
[Guest]: at the same time
[Guest]: Was Jaydev Unadkat. Jaydev Unadkat has been a topper almost all his life
[Guest]: And it's just that he's chosen cricket because cricket just has given so much money and opportunity for him
[Guest]: But he's a sharp guy as sharp as he can get and I could have seen him going to an IIM Ahmedabad and
[Guest]: Studying out there just as much as I could have
[Guest]: Played cricket so for him those choices would be more difficult
[Guest]: But given the kind of money that the IPL has opened up, I think it's an inevitable that he'd made the choices
[Guest]: He did then see the second thing is today's management institutes and all they actually celebrate this kind of a
[Guest]: Background so for example two guys. I know who've been to ISB. Viren Raskina played hockey for India went to ISB and
[Guest]: Shemal Vengankar again played Ranji Trophy for Mumbai played against a visiting English side and took three four wickets
[Amit Varma]: He's also gone to ISB. In fact I've seen that match where he played that game against visiting England side
[Amit Varma]: He was a very controlled line and length Magrathas bowler, but slower, so
[Amit Varma]: Magrathas bowler but slower is a problem
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but still Magrathas
[Amit Varma]: Always argue with 700 test wickets. Yeah, yeah always in that corridor. So how many years were you with KKR?
[Guest]: I was seven years with KKR and yeah, I mean I was fortunate because I saw the bad stuff first
[Guest]: You know what is a bad stuff the bad stuff in the sense that you know we had a coach who was you know?
[Guest]: obviously saw it at that point in time as something that this is going to be the ultimate moneybags leak because you know the
[Guest]: Kind of owners the kind of people and so he saw it as an opportunity
[Guest]: And I think what John at that time wanted to do was he wanted to control the cricket and one of the you know
[Guest]: We talked about this four captains theory for year two and then you know McCullum was made captain, but at that point in time
[Guest]: He wanted to run the team and I think and what we've realized over time if you see the KKR teams that have been successful
[Guest]: It's been the coach who's supported a captain
[Guest]: But it's a captain's call finally of what the team was and I think you cannot run a team from outside
[Guest]: Not a cricket team you see football and all that the managers are really the bosses because this you put your input before the game
[Guest]: But in a game what can a football captain do within the course of a game almost nothing?
[Guest]: He doesn't even have a chance to talk to them, but it's in cricket. You're changing fielding positions
[Guest]: You're doing everything you're encouraging the guy at the other end
[Guest]: You're sending out messages saying you know do this increase the bowling date
[Guest]: so a captain has a lot more say in cricket than he does in almost any other sport and therefore you cannot have a
[Guest]: Captain who's completely subservient to the coach, and that's what I think he was trying to do truth
[Guest]: Is we also didn't have enough talent in 2009 because Gale and all were going back early
[Guest]: So we didn't have enough firepower our Indian batting we had depended our theory was getting a lot of good Indian bowlers
[Guest]: And our own Indian batsman was going to be sure of and somebody you know a couple of the other guys
[Guest]: That didn't happen at all and sure of himself was obviously disincentivized given the fact that his captaincy had been removed
[Guest]: So it was one bloody mess
[Guest]: And I think it was very good that it happened to kick at that early on because it sorted out a lot of things for
[Amit Varma]: The team and you know whatever I read about
[Amit Varma]: Say basketball or baseball or the way it's run in the US and all and it's clear to me that you know when you own
[Amit Varma]: A franchise there are a lot of moving parts which need to come together
[Amit Varma]: There's a sort of the culture that is there's how the owners approach the franchise and the kind of freedom
[Amit Varma]: They give their people there's a sort of the management culture the dressing room culture
[Amit Varma]: there's a whole thing happening with scouting and analytics and
[Amit Varma]: you know a lot of moving parts need to come together and
[Amit Varma]: And did people who ran the franchises at the IPL from the start think about that in a systematic way or is it that is
[Guest]: That something that came with time. I think it came with time. I'm being very honest with you
[Guest]: I think it came with time everyone, you know, everyone at some point has read money ball, but you know
[Guest]: And see again money ball again to accept it for that
[Guest]: Everything it said was the right way to doing things is also not necessarily true and a lot of teams of the others
[Guest]: They did the you know
[Guest]: They threw the baby out of the bathwater saying that you know
[Guest]: This analytics makes no sense at all and you know, we should just abandon it and go back to basics
[Guest]: It's famously Delhi in 2011. I remember looked at it that way saying, you know, this is too much
[Guest]: We don't need this other teams when the other way they went too far into analytics and you know
[Guest]: Analytics does not look at how a player gels with another player and you know that can have huge consequences in a team
[Guest]: You know players being insecure for example is a huge issue
[Guest]: So the single one golden rule and this is the great thing I had
[Guest]: After John Buchanan, I had the opportunity of working with two very very good coaches
[Guest]: One was to have what more coach Sri Lanka change the world of cricket
[Guest]: I'm what Sri Lanka did 96 just took the 92 New Zealand theory forward to its logical conclusion and won them a World Cup and
[Guest]: Then Trevor Bayliss who was a fantastic coach. He was he was a guy was Sri Lanka 2011, you know, you make them reach the finals and
[Guest]: Both these guys the way they ran the franchise, you know, it was a very simple in their heads
[Guest]: The two things that they were very clear about was communication
[Guest]: So communication meant why is a particular player going to play?
[Guest]: He should know what his job is
[Guest]: He should know and he is not playing he should know what needs to change for him to play
[Guest]: So for example for Bisla
[Guest]: It's clearly a situation that if Brendan McCullum cannot play for any reason either is injured or we don't have
[Guest]: We need four other foreigners other than Brendan McCullum. You're going to play
[Guest]: Before that you don't have the opportunity to play but keep yourself fit because given the fourth
[Guest]: You can have only four international players
[Guest]: You might just have an opportunity and that's exactly what happened just before the 2012 finals
[Guest]: Balaji got injured
[Guest]: We needed another fast bowler Brett Lee had to come into the team the moment Brett Lee came into the team
[Guest]: Brendan McCullum had to be dropped because you have Shakir who's of all-rounder Jacques who's an all-rounder and
[Guest]: You have Sunil Narayan. They couldn't be dropped. So Brendan even though he had top score in the previous match
[Guest]: So that's exactly how Bisla knew that he had to step in there
[Guest]: But if you tell that to Bisla one day before that this is you're gonna play he's not going to be ready for it
[Guest]: So what is the single most important thing firstly during the IPL there is very little coaching
[Guest]: Why very little coaching firstly what you're going to coach?
[Guest]: How many players need to coach Sunil Narayan or a Brendan McCullum or a Brett Lee? What are you gonna teach them?
[Guest]: You're not going to teach them anything
[Guest]: secondly, even the Indian players the IPL is so tough and as a routine you may have two three practices before and maybe
[Guest]: Three four during the IPL. I have not seen more than five or six practices in any IPL
[Guest]: What are you going to get done in five or six nets nothing?
[Guest]: So what do you do you manage the talent that you have you manage their health very well
[Guest]: you make sure that they gel in the best possible way for these one and a half months and
[Guest]: Then you try and make sure that when they win they maintain their shape when they lose they maintain their shape as a team so that
[Guest]: They can recover fast. That's it. You can't go there, which is why I feel that Gary Kirsten
[Guest]: You know when people thought that he's going to be the next great thing in IPL t20 coaching
[Guest]: My thing was that I love Gary
[Guest]: I think it's a fantastic coach, but Gary so far is used to coaching national teams for nine to ten months a year
[Guest]: Working with players giving them the opportunity building them over time the IPL is a completely different game altogether
[Guest]: Here are my players here my moving parts. I've got them together three days before the tournament. I've got one net
[Guest]: I've got to decide no team and on the run next in the next 45 days
[Guest]: I'm going to play 14 matches, which is going to decide my fate
[Guest]: So to even compare a national team coach and compare the situations he comes in with to this is I mean
[Amit Varma]: It just is a completely different ballgame really different skills. We'll take a quick commercial break now and when we come back
[Amit Varma]: We'll talk about the other sports management. You've done outside cricket
[Unknown]: Hello and welcome to a brand new and exciting week on IVM
[Unknown]: We'd like to give a shout out to our sponsors
[Unknown]: Storytel and paytm money on the scene and the unseen Amit Verma's guest is quiz master and sports expert joy Bhattacharya
[Unknown]: Joy talks about his journey as a team director for the Kolkata Knight Riders his role in the under-17 FIFA World Cup and the
[Unknown]: evolution of televised sports in India on
[Unknown]: Advertising is dead Varun talks to founder and editor of dead ant Raveena Ravel
[Unknown]: They talk about dead end as a platform to discuss news and events around comedy on gun Tantra
[Unknown]: Alok and sir are you are joined by dr. Carol's Perry to talk about the role of women in electoral politics on
[Unknown]: Simplified Chuck and Naren are joined by director insights of brandscape worldwide
[Unknown]: Utsav memoria for part two of how to travel on a daisy budget on geek food Dinkar and Jishnu talk about the highly
[Unknown]: Distinctive director screenwriter and producer Edgar Wright on IVM likes IVM staffers a bus
[Unknown]: That's me Darius and Madhuri are discussing the highest IMDb rated series Chernobyl and also delve into the phenomena of grief watching on
[Unknown]: the habit coach podcast Ashton talks about the beliefs of bad and good habits and how a
[Unknown]: Habit that is bad for someone can be good for someone else on our Canada podcast Hale Hara day
[Unknown]: She Ranjani speaks to Ganesh Chakravarty and Takshashila
[Unknown]: Institutions Soumya Nandan and her endeavor to revive the interest of ancient board games in India on equity say yes
[Unknown]: She not mythanthaya senior VP at Motilal Oswal AMC talks to Anupam about value migration and how it's different from value
[Unknown]: Creation and with that let's continue on with your show
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with joy Bhattacharya about how to build a sports ecosystem and now we've you know
[Amit Varma]: Just spoken about cricket and KKR and all of India is interested in that
[Amit Varma]: So let's move on from that to something not so many Indians would really care about deeply which is football
[Amit Varma]: Which was your next project? So tell me a little bit about that
[Amit Varma]: Like why did you leave KKR and how did how did football happen?
[Guest]: So KKR those days this was 2014 remember and we just won we won the KKR
[Guest]: We won the IPL and then we reached the finals of the Champions League
[Guest]: Champions Trophy, you know, it was called Champions League and then Sunil Narayan got called for
[Guest]: Just two days before and the strangest part of it is and I still debate this with Javagal Srinath
[Guest]: That the balls that they gave him
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: They called in one match and the balls that they called him for the next match were totally different deliveries
[Guest]: So my point was that I mean either that's a chuckle. This is a chuckle. What are you trying to say?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, even your calls are not consistent. So any for whatever it is
[Guest]: He was called we lost that match, but that was it
[Guest]: I mean if we had won 14 matches in a row and I think you know
[Guest]: We were just on a roll and I thought that I'd never have an opportunity
[Guest]: Where so much has happened with KKR and so many good things have happened and at that point in time
[Guest]: I just heard and I'd done some work with football for a while and
[Guest]: I'd heard that they were looking at the under-17 football World Cup and it was really exciting was to bring a FIFA event into
[Guest]: India was really huge
[Guest]: so they had a panel of guys to interview us and they would at that point in time looking at a CEO and
[Guest]: The person who also came the only person who came from abroad to apply for the job
[Guest]: There were a couple who was in the same there was about 300 odd Indians
[Guest]: Was this chap called Javier Chepi who had been running Chile the Chilean World Cup at that point in time?
[Guest]: But he had just resigned for you know differences and Chile's
[Guest]: Football system was particularly, you know dire at that point in time. So
[Guest]: Javier knew exactly how to run FIFA wants a World Cup to be run and
[Guest]: When I was there, they said that you know what joy is also here and you know
[Guest]: Maybe what joy can do is what government needs what marketing needs?
[Guest]: what how does football work in this part of the world and how
[Guest]: How you can bring what FIFA needs and what the international standards are and you sort of become a double header
[Guest]: So he was a tournament director. I was a project director and as it turned out that Javier is the most difficult
[Guest]: honoree mad
[Guest]: Human being that I have the privilege to work with but it was an absolutely it was in some senses
[Guest]: It could have been a marriage made in hell or a marriage made in heaven as it so turned out
[Guest]: we had an absolute blast together, I mean and
[Guest]: And the great thing about it was four days within getting that we were around the country looking at venues
[Guest]: You know because the first thing you need to do if you have a World Cup is
[Guest]: What are the places where you can actually play and there are two parts to it?
[Guest]: One is the stadium itself
[Guest]: So in all the issues of the stadium I say for example one thing that FIFA will have that
[Guest]: No Indian Stadium normally has is four dressing rooms because you had double headers and FIFA
[Guest]: Will not have a situation where both teams don't have
[Guest]: Proper dressing rooms. So even in cricket, I've been there in a double header in
[Guest]: Hyderabad and one team has had to wait outside in a sort of
[Guest]: Assembled area jury rigged area just because they are not two dressing rooms
[Guest]: FIFA would not allow a game to happen under the circumstances
[Guest]: so firstly we were looking at all the stadiums and what the dressing rooms are about and
[Guest]: then we are looking at practice grounds because the practice grounds have to be as good as
[Guest]: The normal turf because that's where most of the teams are going to spend most of their time playing
[Guest]: So if that turf is not good enough, you're gonna have injuries. You will have injuries means the main tournaments affected
[Guest]: So finding four grounds in every the same that's actually the real bequest of FIFA also because those
[Guest]: 24 practice grounds in those six cities are what matches are going to play on anyway in the main
[Guest]: I mean the main stadiums are going to be used anyway this way that way but how well you make the other stadiums is what
[Guest]: Happens and I remember we were in Kochi and we were in the middle of a field and it was completely swampy field was near
[Guest]: The Maharaja Stadium. No, it was the fisheries state
[Guest]: it was an area owned by the fisheries and we were there with our
[Guest]: Tape measures measuring lens and all and I remember going back to Delhi and three days later seeing a you know
[Guest]: Nice new story saying 21 foot python found inside that area
[Guest]: but it was like that we went from and
[Guest]: Literally Javier and me Javier firstly here this and I speaking as a quizzer. He had a thirst for facts that
[Guest]: Was unbelievable. So he knew every name of every ground in Goa
[Guest]: Exact, you know uber distance this takes seven point nine two kilometers to this ground. He knew the pronunciation and
[Guest]: We tracked down every possible ground in the country to play in those six stadiums
[Guest]: So it was it was that and secondly, he was really dedicated about you know, wanting to raise the standard he was in that sense
[Guest]: Socialist in his belief saying that you know, we need to make this it was always our World Cup
[Guest]: It was not India's World Cup. It was our World Cup and so we did a whole lot of things
[Guest]: so the most interesting thing is and I keep saying this that we went to the government for the first time Javier and me to
[Guest]: Meet in those days how we are actually picked up a lot of Hindi by the time he reached the end
[Guest]: But those days we went to meet a sort of mid-level official
[Guest]: Who looked at us and he sort of he was wearing those shoes that look like chappals
[Guest]: I mean chappals that look like shoes. They're like shoes in the front and chappals at the back
[Guest]: Okay
[Guest]: he's picking his nose and he was sitting in front and we waited for half an hour you go inside and he said
[Guest]: How are you a World Cup can I have a football wallet? You near I said, huh?
[Guest]: So yes, I have keen to kill them. So up
[Guest]: but I did you got FIFA go
[Guest]: Do team in the killing India India be on the host in a lot of team Banta
[Guest]: So however that point does not understand that much in this. So he's hearing India
[Amit Varma]: Seeing you in show
[Guest]: So it's in a nickel in this half up so she must have coming and that was that I mean and how here I sort of
[Guest]: Dragged him away because he had a temper and he didn't know enough Hindi to be able to figure out
[Guest]: But that was the kind of official we dealt with
[Guest]: So after that the government of India came and asked us that you know
[Guest]: Can you give us a report on what needs to be done?
[Guest]: So how we are prepared a Gantt chart, which had 8,000 items in it
[Guest]: Magnificent. Okay, and Javier was he was
[Guest]: He was the fastest typer and you know
[Guest]: He was very good at what he did and he was very fast and he went into this 8,000 for three months
[Guest]: We didn't hear from them after three months. He came back and they said that
[Guest]: By the way, can you simplify it a little bit? So he said yeah, this has about seven and a half thousand
[Guest]: How many do you want?
[Guest]: He said about 14 would be really good
[Guest]: So from seven half thousand they wanted us to bring it down to 14
[Guest]: Soon we realized we had a real problem and then we found a real solution
[Guest]: The problem we had was every ground remember is owned by a regional state government
[Guest]: A satrap sport is a subject which is a state subject, you know in that sense
[Guest]: So Kolkata is run by Mamata Banerjee
[Guest]: You know at that time Goa is run by the then chief minister of Goa Parikar was there at that point in time
[Guest]: Kerala is run by first it started with the Congress government and then it became a this thing CPM government
[Guest]: Delhi is run by a different government altogether
[Guest]: So each of these are a government then you have the government of India who has certain amount of overlays
[Guest]: Certain amount of money certain amount of things you want to know then you have FIFA who's a government by itself
[Guest]: Then you have FIFA's global sponsors like coca-cola adidas these guys then you want to get sponsors of your own
[Guest]: So there's so many all these are people who basically are invested in you
[Guest]: and you have to manage all these parties to be able to run a world cup and
[Guest]: Within two months we realized it's impossible to keep all of these people happy
[Guest]: So after that basically what we did was we said the only people we can really keep happy and keep this running is FIFA
[Guest]: Fortunately the All India Football Federation the guy who got us on board and was with us Kushal Das was the secretary-general
[Guest]: He was a cool guy. He was really wanting to make this world cup. So he backed us to the full
[Guest]: What we did after that was write rules
[Guest]: So every time the government of India or any state government came up with an objection
[Guest]: We wrote a rule which FIFA has never heard of before and told them that you know
[Guest]: This is the FIFA rule about this. I'm sorry. It has to be followed
[Guest]: Okay, so I have calculated that over his you know, three years of being in India
[Guest]: Javier has written about 150 FIFA rules
[Guest]: Which if I would not have heard of in their career my god
[Amit Varma]: And there's no situation where the government is like saying the throwing an ego fit and saying we don't care if this is a FIFA
[Guest]: Rule this is FIFA. We would always see that way
[Guest]: We were very good with the imagery and all FIFA and we said no under 17 World Cup will the last I mean
[Guest]: People who play in the under 17 World Cup are players like Neymar
[Guest]: These are all the players, you know
[Guest]: These are the guys who emerged from the under 17 World Cup and all the top footballers from Mbappe to Neymar
[Guest]: To this thing they've all come from the under 17 system. I said those are the guys who want to play
[Guest]: This is the rules you want them. You don't want to make up your mind
[Guest]: So I think we did a good job with that and I think you know
[Guest]: It was it was not done in a bad way
[Guest]: We never wrote something that didn't need to be written
[Guest]: But sometimes even things that FIFA normally said but has not been documented. We said that okay
[Guest]: This is it. This has to be done and
[Guest]: It worked famously because I think you can't you can't be subject to 10 people
[Guest]: You know having completely different opinions and within that we also had a great great urge to try and make a difference
[Guest]: So we started something called mission 11 million
[Guest]: It was an interesting thing that we said that you know
[Guest]: How can we make a difference because you can't just make a difference for the 22-day tournament
[Guest]: So mission 11 million what we basically said was that forget academies academies are 1.001 percent of India's sport
[Guest]: The only pipe in India that reliably works in getting to children
[Guest]: is
[Guest]: Schools because education is so important that the school system is the one not system in India not broken
[Guest]: So mission 11 million is a very simple thing. What was our objective?
[Guest]: We said in one year, we can't coach them to become better players. We don't have the scale
[Guest]: We don't have the time but what we can do is
[Guest]: incentivize kids to play football and
[Guest]: And incentivize teachers and schools to want them to play football. So what we went and did was a very simple thing
[Guest]: We went to the government we went everywhere and we said that look boss. This is what you need to
[Guest]: We would have a seminar. We'd call the principal of the school because we saw a sports teacher in the
[Guest]: Picking order of things in school was just above the you know security guard sometimes below him as well
[Guest]: I mean, I'm being very totally honest with you
[Guest]: That's how it is because you know, it's a maths teacher who's on top the English teacher the below the principal
[Guest]: These are really the teachers one
[Guest]: So we said that if we even if we tell this guy that you know
[Guest]: Promote football in your school is not going to make any difference. We called in the principals
[Guest]: We'd have a one-hour seminar where we showed them what the World Cup was about and the most important thing
[Guest]: We showed them was you can play football
[Guest]: Anyway, one of the biggest wastages that happen in our India system is you have so many schools were insisting on having this big ground
[Guest]: Where 11 and 11 kids play nowhere in the world below the age of 15
[Guest]: Will you have 11 and 11 games being played by kids because kids are just not physically fit to play on these big grounds
[Guest]: So what happens one kick kids kicks a ball it goes in the other side by the time it comes back
[Guest]: It doesn't we show them take this entire field now break it up into eight fields
[Guest]: One two, three, four, five six seven eight play five and five with free substitution each of these fields
[Guest]: So now you have five and five ten. Okay, plus a free substitution say about 16 kids
[Guest]: 16 into say 8. Okay, that's what 144 kids or
[Guest]: 128 kids are playing in a place where a maximum 17 18 20 kids are normally playing and
[Guest]: Then we said you can play in any small area is the greatest thing about football is such a resource light sport
[Guest]: You need four stones and you know one ball
[Guest]: That's all you need to play football and that's how you be incentivized to play football and we'd say
[Guest]: I'm going to address and said don't give us money. We don't need money
[Guest]: We've got certain amount of money from the government of India. Give us merchandise. Okay, we went to Hero Motors
[Guest]: Don't give us money. Give us six motorcycles for the teachers for the best teachers in each region
[Guest]: We implemented mission 11 million. Let's give them motorcycles
[Guest]: so that teacher is also in shit somebody got a motorcycle for actually promoting football and
[Guest]: We bought and give away some 60,000 balls and we just say play the sport
[Guest]: If you play it well send us the things your school could feature so not only can the kids win merchandise and stuff
[Guest]: But the school principal could get interviewed they could win something the teachers could win something
[Guest]: So we incentivize the entire ecosystem of Indian football and we said what are we doing?
[Guest]: We're just giving away kids to play more football as much as we can and that's what we did with it
[Amit Varma]: So what can you interest me is that you're brought into this project as a project director to say?
[Amit Varma]: Okay, set up this World Cup set up this event, but you also taken upon yourself
[Amit Varma]: The ambit of doing something for Indian football per se so I have sort of two related questions here
[Amit Varma]: one is that is
[Amit Varma]: football a sport that Indians can excel in
[Amit Varma]: Naturally for a couple of reasons one is obviously we're a tropical country and weather and blah blah blah
[Amit Varma]: And we're not really a sporting culture in that sense. And I mean are we suited for the sport?
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know genetically you would assume it has been theorized that Indians are not good at sports
[Amit Varma]: Which require either extreme speed or extreme stamina and therefore we excel in sports
[Amit Varma]: Which requires skill like batting and cricket does or badminton and so on and we won't really have 100 meter sprinters
[Amit Varma]: Or we won't really dominate marathons and so on and so forth and we'll be middling in all of those is football
[Amit Varma]: Therefore something that like do you think those barriers exist? Okay, two things
[Guest]: So, you know, I think it's a it's fairly this point has been debated although one is that you look at Chile Chile has about
[Guest]: 16 million people 15 16 million people
[Guest]: So 16 million people having the same build Chile was you know number at one time rated number two three four five in the world
[Guest]: Okay to have 16 million people who have a similar genetic build to Chileans
[Guest]: I'm sure we do because our genetic, you know
[Guest]: Masala is so thick that it is there to is that you know
[Guest]: The second argument that we kept coming across was look at the Europeans look at the grounds
[Guest]: They have you know, look at the grounds in England. Look at the grounds in Germany. Look at the grounds in France
[Guest]: We'll never be there and I said, okay boss 11 World Cups have been won by countries like that
[Guest]: Look at the nine World Cups out there. Look at Brazil. Look at Argentina. They're shambolic
[Guest]: I'm telling you the facilities in Uruguay Argentina Brazil are shambolic
[Guest]: They're worse than Indian grounds kids play on the streets kids make it out there their system is more political than us more corrupt
[Guest]: And us why do they make it because at a very young level parents are invested in the game
[Guest]: So it's passion for football that has made a difference. It is not the fact that they had more facilities than us
[Guest]: Passion translates into one more thing, which is also a realistic thing
[Guest]: It's not so much the difference in talent, but the difference I'll tell you is somebody like for example a
[Guest]: a good example is a Messi a Messi has been picked up from say 6 7 the age of 6 7 by the time a
[Guest]: Equivalent of a Messi say playing for Brazil for the under 17 World Cup came to India
[Guest]: He's played some six being played when a competitive football. I'm not saying this thing
[Guest]: It's the it's what the level is. It's he's been playing competitive matches since he's 7 8 years old
[Guest]: So he's played 10 years of competitive matches
[Guest]: 150 500 competitive matches typically in India a kid starts playing
[Guest]: Comparative matches only at 13 14 so in fact one of the big things that they're now trying to do is
[Guest]: Promote what we call baby leaks where kids at the age of 7 8 9 because if talent wise you've got to go
[Guest]: Go there you have to be picked up at 7 8 you can't they can't afford to you know
[Guest]: See you at 13 14 you'll have a few late bloomers, but if you're not starting to tap
[Guest]: Top level talent at 7 8 which is what it happens around the world you can't catch up
[Guest]: So I think that will make a difference, and that's what you know it's all about that getting them there
[Guest]: I think genetically is a less of a problem as creating systems and see it's not just you know
[Guest]: How do baby leagues work baby leagues don't work on government support anything baby league works on?
[Guest]: Communities where in this school the parents are coming to watch because the football is a real interest how many parents do you see?
[Guest]: Of a previous generation still now it's become a bit more common
[Guest]: Do you see of a previous generation going to watch the kids playing football or playing a match something it never used to happen because?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's roti kapda makhan a padai karo get on with it now
[Guest]: You're getting a little more of that, but you're getting it where you're getting it still in upper-class urban, India
[Guest]: You're not getting it. You know at the places where it matters
[Guest]: You're not getting it in the ranch ease and the you know the these things bear ample to the world and the you know
[Guest]: But in does with the world that's where at that level if you start spotting kids at that level
[Guest]: It is play 45 50 matches a year. That's when you're gonna get results
[Amit Varma]: I guess the dual conditions for you know football really flourishing in India would be a culture and be institutions and
[Amit Varma]: speaking of the first and it strikes me that you know the
[Amit Varma]: Phenomenon that you point out that in some of these football crazy countries you have parents going with their kids and watching them play and
[Amit Varma]: All of that and that culture is there, but if you look at the incentives in place because it's an aspirational thing
[Amit Varma]: They know that if the kid reaches the top or even if he doesn't reach the top and has a middling kind of career
[Amit Varma]: He can still make a hell of a lot of money and be a star
[Amit Varma]: Is there a vicious circle in play in India where because you know?
[Amit Varma]: There's no culture and ecosystem football isn't really a lucrative sport for Indian players
[Amit Varma]: And therefore because of that people aren't incentivized to get
[Guest]: Interested enough play enough and of course it is see but the other thing is that you know
[Guest]: You'll be surprised two things really make a difference one is you know the actual play
[Guest]: The second is what we call making of legends making of stars if you go say to rural
[Guest]: Indiana you know Kentucky in Indiana especially really what we call basketball country
[Guest]: They're hardcore basketball country, and if you go there
[Guest]: And you'll see there are high school heroes who are revered for the past 30 years
[Guest]: You know that guy that was a year they won the state championship or whatever. He's not even played in the NBA
[Guest]: He's not even played really well in college
[Guest]: But he was a high school star, and they have a system or a system where these people are recognized
[Guest]: I've seen that in small parts in certain parts of the country
[Guest]: I mean there are certain parts of Rajchi where you know you know certain
[Guest]: You know a dung dung as a hockey star was really revered and you know in that community dung dung was very big
[Guest]: And that's why a lot of Adivasi kids tribal kids wanted to play a hockey for example
[Guest]: But it's not happened over systematic. You'll see little bits of it in Bombay
[Guest]: You have kanga league legends in India. You know you have that legend, but that's what you know at that level
[Guest]: The guy must be incentivized even if he's a star in this little place that people want to come and watch him shake his hand
[Guest]: And say you know he can sell cars because somebody wants to go and buy it from the salesman who's a you know high school
[Guest]: Star you know that's the level at which
[Guest]: You actually make a difference support if you expect him to make a difference only if he reaches the NBA you simply will not have
[Guest]: Enough people in that ecosystem, and I don't see that haven't seen that happening often in India. There are little pockets in Kolkata
[Guest]: For example you know you play club level football at some level of football you you got that opportunity
[Guest]: More in the suburbs of Kolkata and this thing are you that guy used to play for Aryans yet?
[Guest]: He's still a big name in the locality. He's played first division football
[Guest]: That is what you know
[Guest]: makes sport happen because sport the truth of it is
[Guest]: Everyone will tell you you know look at America and be and all that the truth of it is in any sport in the world
[Guest]: Any sport in the world the proportion of people wanting to play to the proportion of people being?
[Guest]: Professionals is so small that it is never a bet worth taking
[Guest]: the only reason it's a bet worth taking is if you actually feel the stars in the starlight and you're foolish enough to dream for
[Guest]: It and you get recognition even at this level that you know it makes you feel good about yourself
[Guest]: Professional sport is never a rational proposition
[Guest]: Unless your surname happens to be tendulkar or callous
[Guest]: I mean and you're so touched with greatness that from the age of 13 everyone's looking at you and saying dude this guy's gonna play
[Amit Varma]: First but in that sense to turn that around when you say it's not a bet worth taking of course it isn't but then the
[Amit Varma]: Point is in a lot of countries people
[Amit Varma]: Kids don't get into sport because they're taking a bet they get into sport because there is a sporting culture
[Amit Varma]: And that is what they would do naturally
[Amit Varma]: I mean just contrasting Australia and India for example that there you have so many more people in the free time will go
[Guest]: Surfing or they'll go absolutely, but the truth of it is you're right, but that's in India
[Guest]: Playing sport is an effort much more than it is anywhere else and that's the difference
[Guest]: I mean look I'll give you a very simple example the number of caddies in India who become champions
[Guest]: Why have they become champions because they have have they are people who have had access to those?
[Guest]: You know the kit that these things the links for the longest time the access itself is
[Guest]: Huge problem in India. It's a huge problem in the axis a huge problem in that time is a huge problem in India
[Guest]: These are things that come in the way you're right if I play it long enough
[Guest]: And I suddenly say wow I'm good enough at it
[Guest]: I have to play that many games to be able to get that opportunity and again in football
[Guest]: What is the problem if by 9 10? I'm not spotted. I'm mostly I'm too late for really making it big internationally
[Amit Varma]: Right and and football you would imagine is is actually a game suited to India and at least one respect that access is not such
[Guest]: A big deal. It's a very cheap sport. That's what we try to do mission lemon resource light
[Guest]: Just get kids as many kids playing as possible then get little
[Guest]: Organized little leagues as possible and just get them to kick a ball the only way you know
[Guest]: Resource like sports are very important, which is I volleyball
[Guest]: Also, I'm a huge proponent of for that one reason you just need one net and one ball
[Guest]: And it can be played at a variety of levels. I mean even cricket requires a certain amount of skill to play
[Guest]: Okay, and volleyball and football are that way the easiest and just to get a ball across the net
[Amit Varma]: You know forget this and everyone's involved. It's not like in cricket just keep us bad
[Amit Varma]: He's batting and taking the bat home and correct exactly
[Guest]: So and I'm that's what we told it and we said in football before the age of 15
[Guest]: Nobody should be paying anything other than five of five and five four and four three and three
[Guest]: Because those are the games that way everyone is involved
[Guest]: In 1111 big games kids people are not involved. It's meant for more professional style of play
[Amit Varma]: So what were the challenges you faced?
[Amit Varma]: In both of these just mean one in organizing the event and be in just making football a deeper part of the culture
[Guest]: So big so first the challenges we faced were you know in making this event happen was just actually getting grounds ready
[Guest]: And I remember you know in India
[Guest]: We look at grounds exactly the opposite way that say a FIFA looks at it and for all its sins
[Guest]: in the political part of the organization the side of FIFA that we dealt with was the
[Guest]: Administrative the project side the people who actually did things so I remember we went to Guwahati for a match and the first thing
[Guest]: We did was we went straight out in the middle of the field you know and these people were all there to meet us
[Guest]: You know from the Assam Football Association
[Guest]: And we went straight in the whole FIFA delegation went straight to the middle of the pitch first
[Guest]: Because a single most important thing to FIFA was the pitch and the state of the pitch
[Guest]: From the pitch they move to the dressing room. What were the dressing rooms like and that's how an inspection happens
[Guest]: Then they go to the stands what the stands like what are the bathrooms like for the men's bathroom like for the women's bathroom
[Guest]: Like what is the proportion of bathrooms to you know?
[Guest]: Teams of spectators, that's that then they move basically to the
[Guest]: Media Tribune is the media is the place enough for the media to sit are there enough connections are there enough?
[Guest]: Places for them to get food is a view okay for them are there enough televisions are there enough factories
[Guest]: That's a third and then you move to the fourth which is you know where's the VIP area where the people where do they need?
[Guest]: To sit how do they?
[Guest]: This path that they traverse is exactly the opposite that most Indian sport including football traverses
[Guest]: So Indian sports starts with the VIP then moves to the media guy then moves the spectator and absolutely the last is
[Guest]: The actual sportsman and this is true of almost all sports cricket is an honorable exception
[Guest]: Which is why for whatever for all the problems you have with the BCC. I think it has done one thing
[Guest]: It has put Indian sportsmen cricketers right at the top of the heap, and that's I think that's very important for sport
[Guest]: But in football this was exactly the problem as it is and I remember going to a South Asian games
[Guest]: I was talking about in Guwahati and
[Guest]: We had players lined up Indian people who have represented their country, and this is all India Pakistan
[Guest]: You know all these countries were there Bangladesh
[Guest]: And they're standing in a narrow corridor for one and a half hours wearing blazers with no
[Guest]: Air-conditioning no fans waiting for the VVIPs to first come
[Guest]: Then give their speeches then for the opening ceremony to start and then to walk on to the field and that is cruel and remember
[Guest]: We are doing this in Guwahati and some of them are going to be playing in Shillong the next day
[Guest]: So not only do they finish that and they're like dehydrated and three hours in a suit a day before a match
[Guest]: Then the next day they're going to they're going to travel another three four hours go to Shillong and play a match
[Guest]: And that's when you look and say how badly we treat these people how badly we treat sportsmen in this country
[Amit Varma]: It's not funny. I mean the whole I mean this kind of reminds me of ancient Rome where you know you have gladiators
[Amit Varma]: Who are there just for entertainment?
[Amit Varma]: They are the spectacle and it should really be the other way around the player should be the star and everything flows from there
[Guest]: And that's that's one thing that again as I said FIFA BCCI they do well
[Guest]: They may be political in their own way, but there's no doubt who is the hero of that
[Guest]: I mean the dressings room we made for the teams here and that's that's a benefit that will stay for a long long time
[Guest]: The the practice fields that we make and you know what we used to do is to have this very simple thing
[Guest]: It was easy for us to say jury rig up lights because you needed practice at nights
[Guest]: And you need because there were only one team is practicing you needed only one dressing room and one
[Guest]: This thing you need one dressing room and one set of bathrooms
[Guest]: What we said was that look what's the point of doing that if you're going to get a state government to make that
[Guest]: Let's make it two dressing rooms two sets of bathrooms and permanent lights because that means that once this FIFA World Cup is over
[Guest]: This is where the local tournaments will happen
[Guest]: You see the big field is not going to impact play in this state
[Guest]: These small fields these four small fields with floodlights and lights, you know, whether it's in Benalim
[Guest]: You know where the places we did it those fields are really going to be fields which are going to be used year in year out
[Guest]: Those floodlights are going to make a difference to Indian sport Indian football for the next 15 years
[Guest]: Huge knock on effect more people come to see the games as more glamour around the game more of the aspirational
[Amit Varma]: And we genuinely that is the one thing whether we succeeded or failed Javier and me said
[Guest]: We can't just come here do a World Cup 23 day World Cup and go it makes no difference
[Guest]: If he cannot at least make so whatever Mission 11 million
[Guest]: I remember getting a really bad newspaper report about it over you into the school and nothing was there
[Guest]: And here they must have been, you know, we did 21,000 schools in Mission 11 million
[Guest]: There must have been 10,000 schools when nothing happened. They just took the balls and went home
[Guest]: But if they were even you know 10,000 schools where people kids distributed footballs and few more kids played football because of us
[Guest]: It's because we decided to at least try and make a damn difference to what happens to sport in our country
[Guest]: And that was important to us, you know, really I remember this great story about this school
[Guest]: I do not want to mention the name in Goa. They were a girls school and they said, you know
[Guest]: Girls, you know, they come in skirts. So I said they'll play in skirts
[Guest]: They said that you know, there's a cement ground. I said, you know, they can kick the ball in the cement ground
[Guest]: And he said it's too small. It's a badminton court. I said they can play three on three four and four in that
[Guest]: And then the next day they started playing and this mother superior sort of raised her habit a bit and kicked off the ball for the first time
[Guest]: And that picture I have and I will live with that picture and they send me pictures later saying that, you know
[Guest]: Every day we still play football in the school
[Guest]: And that those are the kind of stories that make you feel that is that picture for public consumption
[Guest]: Can I post it? I will I will get that picture of you
[Amit Varma]: If a movie is made on that, I can imagine that being a pivotal scene either at the start or at the end
[Guest]: It does things to you, you know, and that's it. You know, there's this
[Guest]: I mean, we we send a photographer really good friend of mine again
[Guest]: We paid him nothing and said, you know, we can pay for you to go and shoot football kids around the country for this mission
[Guest]: So go there. We can't pay you, but do it. And he did this book
[Guest]: It is absolutely gorgeous. The kind of pictures that he's taken. What's it called? It's about mission
[Guest]: I mean, it's just about mission. I mean, just just covering on the kids
[Guest]: And, you know, we went to a school for the, you know, differently abled kids and, you know, they're playing
[Guest]: And it's it's it's one of those things that you look at and say, OK, this was worth it for whatever it's worth
[Amit Varma]: It was worth it. So now it's, you know, you two guys, you and Javier, you're doing this
[Amit Varma]: You've taken this upon yourself, though it's probably not part of your ambit per se
[Amit Varma]: But now you're done with it. I mean, obviously, to some extent, you've kindled a passion and that continues in various ways
[Amit Varma]: Your infrastructure is there and that culture is there in some schools, but you need longer lasting institutions
[Guest]: We know, but that's what we knew we couldn't. We knew our ambit was there for three years
[Guest]: But we whatever difference and we made many differences
[Guest]: I mean, one of the differences was that every time we go to meet them, they used to ask us
[Guest]: Sir, please give us the number of the car. Because remember, now with Shastri Bhavan on the ministries, you have to give the number of the car
[Guest]: So it can go inside because there was a lot of chaos about, you know, people coming to the ministry and doing things
[Guest]: And when I used to reply on an almost regular basis that we're coming in the metro
[Guest]: They just couldn't wrap their heads around the fact that, you know, these two guys
[Guest]: So the other funny story was that we used to have some people out there who were still there from the 2010 Commonwealth Games
[Guest]: Who were still hanging around there doing something or the other, you know, the court cases or whatever it was
[Guest]: So they used to see us and regularly we used to walk into the Sai canteen, Sports Authority of India canteen
[Guest]: And stand and eat the 30 rupees, the standard fare out there
[Guest]: And one of them who was a sort of their senior officer, let it be known
[Guest]: He called us one day and said, some of my juniors have said that the canteen further down, which is in the next building
[Guest]: That canteen is actually better food than out here
[Unknown]: So he doesn't eat, but some of his juniors have informed him
[Unknown]: And we say, yeah, thanks for the tip
[Guest]: So the next day onwards, we went to that canteen and he was right, it was much better
[Guest]: But we'd go in the afternoon, stand out there, eat our stuff, go in metros
[Guest]: So the thing about it was, we also sort of tried to have a culture in our team and everyone there saying that, boss
[Guest]: This is what it's about. And especially if you're working in football in this country and you are staying in five-star hotel
[Guest]: There's somewhere, there's a disbalance of what's happening
[Guest]: So we, to a certain extent, we certainly worked our talk to whatever extent it was possible
[Guest]: And I think that made a difference, the kind of people who worked with us
[Guest]: Remember, while our team started small, it ended up with, you know, more than 400 people working across it
[Guest]: These guys are also going to be working probably in the indoor sport ecosystem for the next 10-15 years
[Guest]: I think, yeah, there was a start made somewhere about, you know, what sport means
[Guest]: And a large part of it is Javier because of just the way he was
[Amit Varma]: And I guess one of your ambits also must have, to make the event a success
[Amit Varma]: Would also have been to get more bums in seats and to sort of increase the viewership
[Amit Varma]: How did you kind of think about that?
[Guest]: So we did a lot of things and we did very interesting things because we knew we didn't have money
[Guest]: So what we played off was other stuff
[Guest]: So for example, you know, we were in a situation where our ticketing launch was happening
[Guest]: And it was very interesting, our ticketing launch in 2017 was the same time as the Confed Cup's ticketing launch
[Guest]: Confed Cup is the year one Russia before
[Guest]: And we said, how do we make it big? How do we actually make sure tickets are sold?
[Guest]: So I had an idea and I said, 1911 was, if you remember, when Mohun Bagan beat East Yorkshire regiment
[Guest]: For the first ever time that, you know, it was the first real milestone in Indian football
[Guest]: I love the way you said, if you remember
[Amit Varma]: We are both oldish, but not that old
[Guest]: Exactly, I don't remember too much nowadays
[Guest]: But the truth is, I said, so what I did was, Carlos Piol was coming down, which FIFA had sponsored
[Guest]: 1911, the captain was Bijay Das Bahaduri and I think Shibdash was one of them
[Guest]: And his granddaughter-in-law was the only surviving relative of that team
[Guest]: And I flew her down, it was the first time she'd gone to a flight in her life, with Carlos Piol
[Guest]: And I launched the ticket exactly at 7.11pm, that's 1911 in the evening
[Guest]: As a tribute to Mohun Bagan's first thing
[Guest]: So what have I done? I've paid for a ticket for a lady who's never got onto a plane and come out here
[Guest]: And I've basically, I've taken that moment and said that this is in honour of Mohun Bagan
[Guest]: Can you imagine the impact it had in Calcutta?
[Guest]: So a lot of marketing is not just about, you know, how much money I spent in the media
[Guest]: It's the message I give, that I may be FIFA, but I care for India
[Guest]: And we cared, FIFA cared for India, FIFA cared enough
[Guest]: And the way FIFA puts out tickets, they put out 5%, then 5% more, then wait, like that's how it happens
[Guest]: Those first 10% of tickets in Calcutta were sold out within an hour and a half
[Guest]: And I remember at that point in time, Carlos Piol's agent was very close to Infantino
[Guest]: He called up Infantino and said, by the way, the tickets are sold out here
[Guest]: He said, can you send that team to Russia because we haven't managed to sell tickets for the Conference Cup right now
[Guest]: And we were sending, so that's the thing, that, you know, even using marketing
[Guest]: And then we used to turn around and say, look at it, this is where Neymar has come from, you know
[Guest]: This is where this player has come from
[Guest]: All these guys are top stars, started their careers with the FIFA U-17 World Cup
[Guest]: So you're going to watch players who are going to dominate world football over the next 5, 10, 15 years
[Guest]: And it's happening, Mbappe is already dominating
[Guest]: Mbappe played in Chile, the tournament just two years before us
[Guest]: The guys who played for us already, they're making a bond
[Guest]: Jadon Sancho is Borussia Dortmund, he's doing
[Guest]: Vinicius Junior came for the qualifying tournament
[Guest]: Vinicius Junior has just been signed by Real
[Guest]: Phil Foden is a star and he's going to be a star in the making as well
[Guest]: So all these guys are now making it
[Guest]: And that's what, you know, people in sitting in stadiums in India would have said, we saw these guys first
[Amit Varma]: And it was an amazing atmosphere
[Amit Varma]: And how was the television viewership?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how does it compare to, I mean, you can't compare anything to cricket
[Amit Varma]: But how does it compare to before when football was better?
[Guest]: No, no, so, look, the viewership, the interesting viewership we got was actually on-ground viewership, which was crazy
[Guest]: And I remember there was a match between Japan and East Caledonia
[Guest]: Because East Caledonia had qualified for, somehow managed to qualify from the Oceania group
[Guest]: And I think East Caledonia's complete population is about 200,000
[Guest]: And there were 60,000 in the stadium that day
[Guest]: And all these guys got out and they just couldn't this thing
[Guest]: So we had amazing, amazing on-ground crowds
[Guest]: Especially Kolkata, Goa, Kochi gave us fantastic on-ground crowds
[Guest]: And what we did get was a knock-on effect on television
[Guest]: That means we got decent ratings
[Guest]: But these were decent ratings by football standards
[Guest]: They were obviously nowhere close to what cricket did
[Amit Varma]: And what does the whole project teach you about Indian sport per se?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, we just tend to be all about cricket, cricket, cricket
[Amit Varma]: Cricket gets all the eyeballs, cricket gets all the money
[Amit Varma]: Cricket is also the one sport which is not run by the government
[Amit Varma]: All the others, like football, are run by the government
[Amit Varma]: Did it kind of give you the sense that it is not because we are not a sporting nation
[Amit Varma]: But somewhere we have lost an opportunity in, you know, tapping the sporting instinct within people?
[Guest]: Absolutely, I think, you know, I still take a class in IIM Cal almost every year
[Guest]: Where one of the lectures I do is about this, and I call it, and it has changed in my head also
[Guest]: The sorry tale of Indian sport in 16 and a half slides
[Guest]: So very much, and to basically try and explain
[Guest]: Because this question everyone will turn around
[Guest]: Hari, you are working in Indian sport, you are 1.3 billion people, you know
[Guest]: Why don't we produce more winners?
[Guest]: And the question has only changed in the last 20 years
[Guest]: That it was 1 billion people at one time, it's now 1.3 billion, you know
[Guest]: The essence has not changed
[Guest]: So what I do is, you know, I take them back
[Guest]: And I said, you know, this is why sport
[Guest]: And let's leave Kabaddi aside for a moment
[Guest]: Or, you know, the Indian, traditional Indian sports
[Guest]: Sport was really brought to India by the British
[Guest]: Who wanted their soldiers to have a good time
[Guest]: And who happened to think that playing a match against India is a much better way of letting off steam
[Guest]: Than throwing a bomb against us
[Guest]: Which is why they promoted football in Calcutta
[Guest]: To make people get off their energies and their angers and their angst
[Guest]: By sport rather than taking it as a, you know, taking it as war
[Guest]: The second thing was that from there
[Guest]: When they moved out in 1947
[Guest]: The rest of the country was too busy
[Guest]: To, you know, roti kapra, makan, survival
[Guest]: Pakistan on one side
[Guest]: East Pakistan on the other side
[Guest]: China on top of us
[Guest]: We are going to starve as a country
[Guest]: We had too much on our hands
[Guest]: The only guys who actually had time to spare in sport
[Guest]: Was actually royalty
[Guest]: So notice, Maharaj of Santosh, Maharaj of Patiala
[Guest]: Karni Singh, this thing, Singh
[Guest]: Why? Because they are the only people who have time to spare
[Guest]: So if you see
[Guest]: Sporting organizations were dominated for a long time by them
[Guest]: And then came the sort of combination
[Guest]: The politician and the bureaucrat
[Guest]: And I remember telling this tale
[Guest]: Especially till two years
[Guest]: It was completely relevant
[Guest]: It still is
[Guest]: That in 1971, Mrs. Gandhi, you know
[Guest]: The 71 war is happening
[Guest]: Mrs. Gandhi is being called Durga by people
[Guest]: Who we, you know, we don't want to name out here
[Guest]: And, you know, she is
[Guest]: It's a cold war is going on
[Guest]: And then comes, limitation talks are happening in the USA
[Guest]: And a young man gets selected
[Guest]: As the head of the Indian Archery Federation
[Guest]: His name is Vijay Kumar Malhotra
[Guest]: Cut to 2016
[Guest]: And the grandson is now trying to fight
[Guest]: To political power, the cold war is much
[Guest]: Is much ended, 7-8 American presidents
[Guest]: Have passed since then
[Guest]: And who is the head of the federation?
[Guest]: It was Vijay Kumar Malhotra
[Guest]: And that's what Indian sport was
[Guest]: Because in those days when you started off
[Guest]: For the Indian sports person
[Guest]: For the Indian administrator
[Guest]: Remember, if you went abroad in the 70s
[Guest]: You'd normally be allowed to carry
[Guest]: 20 dollars foreign exchange, that was it
[Guest]: So who would
[Guest]: For an administrator, the great opportunity
[Guest]: Was going for a paid holiday abroad
[Guest]: And they are the kind of people
[Guest]: Who dominated Indian administration
[Guest]: The politicians and the bureaucrats
[Amit Varma]: And it's really only after
[Guest]: Was there a lot of money to be made for them?
[Guest]: No, it's not much money, it was power
[Guest]: It was exactly as I said, power
[Guest]: Exactly like I was talking about in Dinda
[Guest]: Where you have a selector who can say
[Guest]: You are the guys who are doing it
[Guest]: So one, it was power, it was influence
[Guest]: And it was 2-3 foreign visits
[Guest]: In 76, why do we go to AstroTurf?
[Guest]: We went to AstroTurf because
[Guest]: The Canadians were unsure
[Guest]: That in 1976
[Guest]: In Montreal they'll be able to play
[Guest]: With proper turf grounds hockey
[Guest]: So they had to change the rules towards AstroTurf
[Guest]: And the Indian and Pakistani guys
[Guest]: Just did not bother
[Guest]: Because they were too busy on a pleasure trip
[Guest]: For shopping and doing other stuff
[Guest]: And we basically sold
[Guest]: And the funny thing is it didn't just hurt
[Guest]: Indian and Pakistani hockey
[Guest]: It hurt hockey because Indian and Pakistan
[Guest]: Nosedived and these were the only countries
[Guest]: Where hockey was a number one or number two sport
[Guest]: The rest of the world, it was always number four
[Guest]: So suddenly come the 2000s
[Guest]: They said, we need Indian hockey
[Guest]: To revive again
[Guest]: The Indian administrators gave it away
[Guest]: The rest of them were very happy to dominate Indian hockey
[Guest]: And suddenly realized without Indian and Pakistan
[Guest]: We don't have a game worth watching
[Guest]: Because we are too small a part of the pie
[Guest]: To really make a difference
[Guest]: So that's how badly
[Guest]: Administration has hurt India
[Guest]: And I remember, I was part of a
[Guest]: You know, when I was in All India Football Federation
[Guest]: Working with the World Cup
[Guest]: We were part of a general body meeting
[Guest]: And I remember once the general body meeting
[Guest]: Was there and said, the registrations
[Guest]: For the local state associations
[Guest]: For all the associations
[Guest]: Went from 500 rupees to 10,000 rupees
[Guest]: Now mind you
[Guest]: Every guy who's sitting out there
[Guest]: Who's a state representative
[Guest]: Has been flown down from his city
[Guest]: Or his or her city of origin
[Guest]: To Bombay or Delhi where it was for a meeting
[Guest]: Kept up, put in a five star hotel or a four star hotel
[Guest]: So 30,000 rupees must have been spent on that
[Guest]: And four guys, associations
[Guest]: Got up and said, 10,000 rupees
[Guest]: That's so much, how can we manage
[Guest]: And Baijung Bhutia was there in the room
[Guest]: You know, again as an observer for some other reason
[Guest]: And he just couldn't help saying it
[Guest]: And he said that, you know
[Guest]: If in one of the most popular states in India
[Guest]: You find it difficult to raise 10,000 rupees
[Guest]: For the world's most popular game
[Guest]: Then maybe you're not the right guys
[Guest]: To run the association
[Guest]: And there was an absolute furor
[Unknown]: But that's the truth of it
[Guest]: That is the truth of it
[Guest]: And you know, people say that all these people
[Guest]: Are corrupt, not all of them are corrupt
[Guest]: Some of them are just really scared
[Guest]: That they run their association
[Guest]: With gmails and hotmails
[Guest]: And mom and pop shops
[Guest]: Which is somebody's basically drawing room
[Guest]: And somebody's bedroom
[Guest]: That's how state associations are run
[Guest]: And they're terrified that if this sport really grows
[Guest]: And the right people come to run it
[Guest]: Then what will happen?
[Guest]: They will lose them because they don't have the ability
[Guest]: To control the rise of the sport
[Guest]: They don't have the ability
[Guest]: They've just been there for 30 years in the sport
[Guest]: And they're stuck and they've got their position
[Guest]: And they look forward to this annual trip to Delhi or Bombay
[Guest]: To go there and association vote
[Guest]: And this thing
[Guest]: They go there to have their local association
[Guest]: Where somebody will put flowers around them before the local tournament
[Guest]: And that's all going to be taken away from them
[Guest]: So the truth of it is
[Guest]: I mean, one of the startups that I've
[Guest]: Wanted to propose for the longest time is
[Guest]: Find the money
[Guest]: To get the good people into Indian sport
[Guest]: At the state association level
[Guest]: Right at the top, you actually have a lot of associations
[Guest]: Who are very smart and intelligent people out there
[Guest]: But the 30 states
[Guest]: That make the voting block
[Guest]: If that does not change
[Guest]: If the quality of the people there does not change, nothing is going to change
[Amit Varma]: And one solution it seems to me
[Amit Varma]: Is kind of what the IPL did to cricket
[Amit Varma]: Is that you bring market incentives into play
[Amit Varma]: And you know
[Amit Varma]: You change the incentives
[Amit Varma]: And that sort of now brings me to your next move
[Amit Varma]: After the U-17
[Amit Varma]: World Cup is over
[Amit Varma]: You're the CEO of the Volleyball League
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that
[Amit Varma]: And how
[Amit Varma]: How was that conceived? Why was that conceived?
[Amit Varma]: Why Volleyball? What was the aim?
[Amit Varma]: What was your ambit there?
[Guest]: What is your ambit there?
[Guest]: So the guys who actually sold the U-17 World Cup
[Guest]: And they did about 5 and 5 and a half million dollars
[Guest]: Of sales in the U-17 World Cup
[Guest]: Which is a huge number
[Guest]: Because the highest number before that ever sold for an U-17 World Cup
[Guest]: I'm not counting Dubai 2015
[Guest]: Because Dubai, no not
[Guest]: Because no Dubai money is
[Guest]: I mean Sheikh might just sponsor it
[Guest]: But otherwise
[Guest]: The last record was
[Guest]: 300,000 was the maximum ever sold
[Guest]: In a U-17 tournament
[Guest]: And we sold about 5 million dollars
[Guest]: First time we had LED boards and all that
[Guest]: So we changed the way we looked at it
[Guest]: So these guys I knew were very competent guys
[Guest]: Baseline in promoting or finding
[Guest]: Sponsorship for sport
[Guest]: So they basically had worked out a 10 year
[Guest]: Association with the Volleyball
[Guest]: Federation of India
[Guest]: And so they said that would I be interested
[Guest]: So before sort of I got on board
[Guest]: What I said was first let's go and have a look at the sport
[Guest]: Because one of the problems football suffers
[Guest]: From in our part of the world is that
[Guest]: International football looks just so much better than Indian
[Guest]: Football that it's very difficult to put them
[Guest]: On side by side and keep watching
[Guest]: Indian football. So I wanted to see
[Guest]: Was the Volleyball watchable to
[Guest]: Start with and I went
[Guest]: We went first to Calicut and then to a place
[Guest]: Which is about 40 kilometers from Vijayawada
[Guest]: And I loved the
[Guest]: Volleyball, the quality of the play was very good
[Guest]: And again I say this
[Guest]: With an untrained eye, maybe there are
[Guest]: People who, International Volleyball viewers will see
[Guest]: It and say it's not good enough
[Guest]: But for a spectacle that you want to watch
[Guest]: It's good enough for you
[Guest]: To have top quality Volleyball out there
[Guest]: And the moment, the place was called Bhimavaran I remember
[Guest]: And once I came
[Guest]: Back I said this is worth doing
[Guest]: And the other reason I looked at it was
[Guest]: If you look at sport, today sport is going to be
[Guest]: Driven by whether we call it television or
[Guest]: OTT or whatever, it's going to be driven by
[Guest]: Remote viewership. Now if you look
[Guest]: At sports, there are some sports
[Guest]: Which are perfect for remote viewership
[Guest]: There are some which are not
[Guest]: So give you a very very good example
[Guest]: Hockey is a tough
[Guest]: Sport to do for remote viewership
[Guest]: Why? Because the ball is very small
[Guest]: The action moves over a fairly large
[Guest]: Field very fast and there are
[Guest]: A lot of routes which are difficult to get through
[Guest]: So hockey is a
[Guest]: Difficult game to watch, on the ground
[Guest]: It's a terrific game to watch
[Guest]: But it's a very difficult game to watch
[Guest]: Additionally table tennis is a
[Guest]: Pretty great sport to play
[Guest]: It's not a great sport to watch on television
[Guest]: Whereas tennis is a very very
[Guest]: Riveting sport because the size
[Guest]: Of the ball and the size of the gladiator
[Guest]: Ship comes through in tennis
[Guest]: It just doesn't seem to in table tennis
[Guest]: So when we looked at it that way
[Guest]: I mean there were three sports which I thought
[Guest]: Were built for television
[Guest]: One is football. Though football is built
[Guest]: For television but it's not built for commercial
[Guest]: Exploitation because the way it is you know it's very little
[Guest]: Time for you to exploit it. You can only put up
[Guest]: The scoreboard at the top. That's all. You can't do very much
[Guest]: Else with it. The second is
[Guest]: Basketball which is perfect because
[Guest]: You have a large ball. Lots of action
[Guest]: Happening. Lots of changing action
[Guest]: Large ball. Lots of commercial
[Guest]: Breaks. Lots of ability to monetize
[Guest]: Volleyball is exactly the same
[Guest]: High flying aerial sport. Lots of
[Guest]: People jumping, smashing
[Guest]: Points, sets. So there are lots of
[Guest]: Commercial breaks. Large ball
[Guest]: The action is very visible. So we said
[Guest]: I knew that this is one of the sports
[Guest]: Where you can actually make a difference
[Guest]: And that's from where it started and then I
[Guest]: Realized that in Kerala for example
[Guest]: It's almost a religion. Volleyball is a huge religion
[Guest]: Kerala, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
[Guest]: That belt has a huge religion and
[Guest]: Then there's a belt out here which is
[Guest]: Madhya Pradesh, Shatisgarh and then up there Punjab, Haryana
[Guest]: These are the belts where a lot of
[Guest]: Volleyball is played
[Guest]: And therefore we started getting together teams
[Guest]: And you know we got. What we got was in fact
[Guest]: We had a team from Kochi. We had one from Calicut
[Guest]: Two from Kerala, one from Chennai
[Guest]: One from Hyderabad. Ronnie Suwala took over
[Guest]: The Mumbai team and we had
[Guest]: A team from Chennai, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad
[Guest]: Which was you know people who run the Special Olympics
[Guest]: They are one of India's largest groups
[Guest]: In sport, they were there
[Guest]: And we had some
[Guest]: The amazing part of it is we played year one only in
[Guest]: Kochi and Chennai and the beauty
[Guest]: Was something that I
[Guest]: My heart warmed to that
[Guest]: I believe that you can make out whether a game works
[Guest]: Or not by real spectators
[Guest]: So the mad day before the Kochi
[Guest]: Calicut match, we actually
[Guest]: Had to have a meeting with the police
[Guest]: To say where is Kochi going to sit
[Guest]: Where is Calicut going to sit. We had a toss of the coin
[Guest]: To say they are going to sit this side
[Guest]: And it is the most amazing sight. I have to show it to you
[Guest]: It's still there on my phone
[Guest]: That you know a thousand guys, they call themselves the Chembada
[Guest]: Chembada is the Red Army of Calicut
[Guest]: Has just landed in buses
[Guest]: And they are marching with their drums
[Guest]: On to the field. And the Kochi
[Guest]: Blue Sky Army is coming with their body paint
[Guest]: And on to the other side
[Guest]: And it's fantastic because I said
[Guest]: This is what sport is about. This is not artificial
[Guest]: You can't create this. It's not a marketing
[Guest]: Gimmick. Guys are painting
[Guest]: Themselves, getting on to a vehicle and coming out here
[Guest]: And when the finals was held in Chennai
[Guest]: You know, Calicut reached the
[Guest]: Finals, so did Chennai
[Guest]: And Chennai by then had caught fire
[Guest]: And there were 6000 people inside that stadium
[Guest]: In Chennai. We originally had
[Guest]: Decided not to open the top tier but we had
[Guest]: To because there was so much demand
[Guest]: There was a sea of yellow and there were
[Guest]: Thousand guys in red and white sitting out there in the middle
[Guest]: Which is the
[Guest]: Calicut supporters. And they were as loud
[Guest]: As the other five and a half thousand
[Guest]: So it was absolutely fantastic
[Guest]: Because my belief is that that's when
[Guest]: You get a game. When actually at the
[Guest]: Grassroots people are watching, people are
[Guest]: Singing. You know there's this shot
[Guest]: Somebody sent me of
[Guest]: In Calicut. People standing outside
[Guest]: You know one of those television shops
[Guest]: And watching. Like typically as you do
[Guest]: For cricket, you know World Cup action happens
[Guest]: You stop and you watch. And then you say okay
[Amit Varma]: This will work.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I just learned 180
[Amit Varma]: Seconds ago from you is that
[Amit Varma]: There is actually a volleyball culture in India
[Guest]: Yeah, it's huge. There used to be a chap
[Amit Varma]: Called Jimmy George who was a
[Guest]: Hero and they made a film on him and he
[Guest]: Played in the Italian league. He was a star in the Italian league
[Guest]: Passed away in an accident in
[Guest]: 87 I think in the 80s
[Guest]: But he was a spectacular player
[Guest]: And he was 6 feet 1 or 2 and he would jump
[Guest]: As much. And he was quite
[Guest]: Volleyball see that way if you
[Guest]: Notice as a game it sort of comes
[Guest]: In from till schools
[Guest]: And then at some point it just disappears. Every school
[Guest]: Has a volleyball court. You know so there's volleyball at
[Guest]: Some level played. I've played it in schools. Yeah
[Guest]: And then you'll see even now the oldies
[Guest]: In the ground will go and play it. You know just getting the ball
[Guest]: Across. That volleyball happens all the time
[Guest]: But because it's not consistently
[Guest]: Shown on television, there's no sport
[Guest]: To catch it. And so we've just done
[Guest]: That and there's this chap called Ajit Lal. They call
[Guest]: Him Hydrogen
[Guest]: In Kerala because he jumps so quickly
[Guest]: Sort of takes off
[Unknown]: So he's called Hydrogen. And there are kids
[Guest]: Who now call themselves Ajit. And we put
[Guest]: Some innovations in the game. So we had something called a
[Guest]: Super point. So super point is
[Guest]: Every match before
[Guest]: 11. So our games are 15. Before 11
[Guest]: Each team can call a super point
[Guest]: On that point you either
[Guest]: Double your points or you double your losses depending on
[Guest]: Who gets it. Either you get 2 points or they get 2 points
[Guest]: And it becomes like really
[Guest]: Tense. So kids in
[Guest]: Localities in Kerala are playing and they have
[Guest]: Super points. And then that's
[Guest]: When you know that you're catching it. In fact
[Guest]: The most interesting part of it was that they were
[Guest]: Watching our telecast in FIVB
[Guest]: Which is the world body of volleyball
[Guest]: And they came down to the finals. They were absolutely
[Guest]: Delighted. They came down to the finals
[Guest]: They want to do a lot more
[Guest]: With Indian volleyball and the truth of it
[Guest]: Is who doesn't want to do a lot in
[Guest]: A country which has 1.3 billion people
[Guest]: So they're really invested in it and
[Guest]: That's the one advantage maybe volleyball has over
[Guest]: Kabaddi which has right now a much larger
[Guest]: Base. Is that there's you know
[Guest]: 220 countries play volleyball over the world
[Guest]: And it's a big sport worldwide and
[Guest]: You know they want India to do well
[Guest]: And one of the first things they did after
[Guest]: That within 2 months was
[Guest]: That the FIVB actually has
[Guest]: Paid for and got
[Guest]: For India a proper
[Guest]: Coach and 2 physios
[Guest]: From abroad who are going to work with the Indian
[Guest]: Team. Because their belief is
[Guest]: The first place that will make an impact is with the Indian
[Guest]: Team. And where are we ranked
[Guest]: In the world? So it's a very funny thing. We were ranked
[Guest]: 38th in the world
[Guest]: Then for 2 years the organization was banned
[Guest]: Because there was some amount of this thing. So it went
[Guest]: To 131. Now I don't know
[Guest]: Where we are again. Because it's a strange one. We
[Guest]: Our team, the team that won this
[Guest]: Played the Asian Club Championship
[Guest]: And it reached the final 4
[Guest]: It lost a heartbreaker to the team that was
[Guest]: The eventual champion. In a 4 set
[Guest]: I think they lost 25-23 in the last set
[Guest]: So yeah, it's, I think
[Guest]: As I said, there's a very
[Guest]: Genuine chance of
[Guest]: 20 seems tough in my
[Guest]: Opinion. 24 is a very reasonable
[Guest]: Olympic qualification
[Amit Varma]: Chance. You know sport is relatively
[Amit Varma]: Cheap to play. Can easily
[Guest]: Catch on. How was season 1?
[Guest]: Season 1 was excellent. I mean season 1 we had
[Guest]: A reach of 21 million. And this
[Guest]: Was in a time when we
[Guest]: When the February 1st
[Guest]: TRI stopped that bunching of channels
[Guest]: I mean you couldn't bunch channels anymore
[Guest]: So they have actually put out this thing
[Guest]: Saying ratings for those 2 months, February
[Guest]: And March should not be considered because there was
[Guest]: Complete disruption. And we were on from
[Guest]: February 2nd to 22nd. But decide
[Guest]: That the reach we got
[Guest]: 21.6 million was very encouraging and
[Guest]: I think the most encouraging for us
[Guest]: Was the thing that we could look at was
[Guest]: Time spent. And time spent
[Guest]: Was actually higher than it was of
[Guest]: Almost any sport. It was more than ISL, it was more than
[Guest]: Kabaddi. Because, so what we
[Guest]: Got to understand was anyone who
[Guest]: Watched it, really liked
[Guest]: It. And that's what we have to work
[Guest]: With. And say that our job is now to
[Guest]: Make sure as many people sample it
[Guest]: As possible. Because we know the game works
[Guest]: As a game it works, it's very
[Guest]: Watchable. So our job is to just make
[Guest]: Sure people know that this game is on
[Guest]: It works and this is the time that it's on. And that's
[Guest]: The big challenge for us. And that's more of a marketing
[Guest]: Challenge. Because I think what has happened
[Guest]: Now is of all the 3 of the
[Guest]: P's of everything else, we have product
[Guest]: At least, we have the product. And that's
[Guest]: No thanks to us, that's thanks to intrinsically
[Guest]: And the international players also we got were excellent
[Guest]: Players. And people like David Lee
[Guest]: Again, 2016 Olympic champion
[Guest]: Is playing for us. That tells you a
[Guest]: Certain bit about the fact that given
[Guest]: The market, an equivalent
[Guest]: Football guy wouldn't be able to get a guy of that quality
[Amit Varma]: And you guys
[Amit Varma]: Actually have. Which is, you know
[Amit Varma]: Since you mentioned the market, a related question I had
[Amit Varma]: Is that, you know, all this is happening
[Amit Varma]: Now, but is it partly
[Amit Varma]: Enabled by the fact that
[Amit Varma]: We have grown to the extent that
[Amit Varma]: There's so much globalization, the markets are much
[Amit Varma]: Bigger. And in a big market like India
[Amit Varma]: Even a niche can actually end up
[Amit Varma]: Being big in itself. Absolutely
[Guest]: And that's the only reason they're growing
[Guest]: That's the only reason they were growing. All these
[Guest]: Opportunities were there before as well. It's only
[Guest]: Now that it becomes commercially viable. It's
[Guest]: Also now that I realized working with FIFA
[Guest]: How closely
[Guest]: The world looks at India, especially
[Guest]: Indian sport. Because the opportunities
[Guest]: Out there is, we are the
[Guest]: Everyone, I mean the NBA says it very
[Guest]: Openly in 2030, you are the world's largest
[Guest]: Market. Can we afford not
[Guest]: To be present in the world's largest market?
[Guest]: And that's exactly
[Guest]: The kind of thing that's fueling
[Guest]: You might not know it, Major League Baseball
[Guest]: Is making a major play to come to India
[Guest]: American football wants to make a major play
[Guest]: To come to India. Because who can afford
[Guest]: To ignore 1.3 billion people?
[Guest]: That's a fact of it. We are the world's
[Guest]: Largest open market sitting and waiting
[Guest]: For people. So every sport
[Guest]: Will want to do it. They might burn their fingers
[Guest]: Some may work, some may not work
[Guest]: But there is no doubt in my head that
[Guest]: At least of the 10, 15
[Guest]: 20 such ideas, thoughts
[Guest]: Leagues that will happen, at least half of them
[Guest]: Will survive and really flourish over time
[Amit Varma]: And you know, we're running out of time. So I'll
[Amit Varma]: Kind of wrap it up with
[Amit Varma]: One final question, which is, you know
[Amit Varma]: Looking ahead and you're obviously still in charge
[Amit Varma]: Of the volleyball league and you're deeply involved with sport
[Amit Varma]: And passionate about sport in various
[Amit Varma]: Ways. Looking ahead, where do you think this is
[Amit Varma]: Going? Will India become a really big sporting
[Amit Varma]: Nation at some point? Will we start winning many
[Amit Varma]: Olympic medals and so on and so forth?
[Amit Varma]: And also, is that something
[Amit Varma]: Where you have to allow market
[Amit Varma]: Processes to play out more and those incentives
[Amit Varma]: To come into play? How should the
[Amit Varma]: Government look at sport? Like how should
[Amit Varma]: India's sports minister, for example
[Amit Varma]: Look at the sports
[Amit Varma]: Ecosystem? Should they try to micromanage
[Amit Varma]: Or should they put institutions
[Guest]: In place? How does it work?
[Guest]: I mean, the sports code
[Guest]: Which they've been threatening to do for the longest
[Guest]: Time is a fairly good
[Guest]: Document to start with, if you can
[Guest]: Enforce it. It didn't put together a lot
[Guest]: Of people. People I respect a lot
[Guest]: Have put their weight behind it
[Guest]: So I think you have to. I think the biggest
[Guest]: Problem in India is, you know
[Guest]: A friend of mine, he's a lawyer called Nandan Kamath
[Guest]: Put it very well. He said, you know
[Guest]: Indian sports administrators look for ambiguity
[Guest]: Because in ambiguity lies power
[Guest]: When there's no ambiguity
[Guest]: There's no power, okay?
[Guest]: And the sports code's job is to
[Guest]: Try and get rid of this ambiguity as much
[Guest]: As possible. So I think one of it will be
[Guest]: Institutional, legal. You have to create
[Guest]: Like Ambedkar did many years
[Guest]: Back, the kind of institutions
[Guest]: That hold over time
[Guest]: That give you crystal clear
[Guest]: Rules as much as possible about what will happen
[Guest]: Forward. The second is market forces
[Guest]: And I see this
[Guest]: Period, this, you know, next
[Guest]: From the last 5 years for the next 10-15 years
[Guest]: To be a huge struggle between
[Guest]: The guys who are stubbornly holding on
[Guest]: To the institutions and places that they've managed
[Guest]: To get in. Because 30 years back
[Guest]: The sport was really small and they've sort of wheedled their way in
[Guest]: And until this is completely
[Guest]: Cleared, we are not
[Guest]: Going to be on the fast lane. Still now
[Guest]: There are so many roadblocks in Indian sport
[Guest]: It's got much better. Some institutions
[Guest]: Have got better, some organizations have got better
[Guest]: Some federations have got better
[Guest]: But until these roadblocks are cleared
[Guest]: And there are many, many, many of them
[Guest]: I think it's going to be difficult
[Guest]: So I see the next 10 years a lot of churn
[Amit Varma]: Hopefully from then on
[Amit Varma]: It'll get faster. Joy, thanks
[Amit Varma]: A lot for coming on the show. I learnt a lot talking to you
[Guest]: Thanks, it was an absolute
[Guest]: Pleasure
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this
[Amit Varma]: Episode, you can follow Joy on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: At Joy Bhattacharj
[Amit Varma]: Now you want to listen to the spelling because this is
[Amit Varma]: Not an easy one. J-O-Y
[Amit Varma]: B-H-A-T-T-A
[Amit Varma]: C-H-A-R-J
[Amit Varma]: That's it. No A at the end
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. Much easier
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the
[Amit Varma]: Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: ThinkPragati.com and ivmpodcast.com
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen is supported by
[Amit Varma]: The Takshashila Institution
[Amit Varma]: An independent center for research and education
[Amit Varma]: And public policy. Takshashila offers
[Amit Varma]: 12-week courses in public policy
[Amit Varma]: Technology policy and strategic studies
[Amit Varma]: For both full-time students and working
[Amit Varma]: Professionals. Visit takshashila.org.in
[Amit Varma]: For more details. Thank you for listening
[Unknown]: Presenting the ATKT Talent Time Podcast
[Unknown]: Where I, Krupa
[Unknown]: And IP Man chat with some
[Unknown]: Immensely talented college students
[Unknown]: About the fun part of college
[Unknown]: Like freshers life, the music and poetry
[Unknown]: Scene, side hustles for college students
[Unknown]: And the not so fun like
[Unknown]: Weird dress codes, hostile deadlines
[Unknown]: And ragging. New episodes
[Unknown]: Every Tuesday on the
[Unknown]: IVMPodcast app, the IVMPodcast
[Unknown]: Website and wherever else you get
[Unknown]: Your podcasts from. Hey Krupa
[Unknown]: Check out my poetry. Roses are red
[Unknown]: Violets are blue
[Unknown]: You are special